---
sutta_code: "SN51.13"
sutta_title:
  - "Chandasamādhisutta "
  - "Concentration due to Desire"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.13]]
> ◄  [[sn51.12-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.14-bodhi]] ►

# SN51.13 samādhi due to Desire

“Bhikkhus, if a bhikkhu gains samādhi, gains one-pointedness of mind based upon desire, this is called samādhi due to desire. He generates desire for the nonarising of unarisen evil unwholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives. He generates desire for the abandoning of arisen evil unwholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives. He generates desire for the arising of unarisen wholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives. He generates desire for the maintenance of arisen wholesome states, for their nondecay, increase, expansion, and fulfilment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives. These are called volitional formations of striving. Thus this desire and this samādhi due to desire and these volitional formations of striving: this is called the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to desire and volitional formations of striving.

“If, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu gains samādhi, gains one-pointedness of mind based upon energy, this is called samādhi due to energy. He generates desire for the nonarising of unarisen evil unwholesome states … for the maintenance of arisen wholesome states, for their nondecay, increase, expansion, and fulfilment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives. These are called volitional formations of striving. Thus this energy and this samādhi due to energy and these volitional formations of striving: this is called the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to energy and volitional formations of striving. \[269\]

“If, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu gains samādhi, gains one-pointedness of mind, based upon mind, this is called samādhi due to mind. He generates desire for the nonarising of unarisen evil unwholesome states … for the maintenance of arisen wholesome states, for their nondecay, increase, expansion, and fulfilment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives. These are called volitional formations of striving. Thus this mind and this samādhi due to mind and these volitional formations of striving: this is called the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to mind and volitional formations of striving.

“If, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu gains samādhi, gains one-pointedness of mind based upon investigation, this is called samādhi due to investigation. He generates desire for the nonarising of unarisen evil unwholesome states … for the maintenance of arisen wholesome states, for their nondecay, increase, expansion, and fulfilment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives. These are called volitional formations of striving. Thus this investigation and this samādhi due to investigation and these volitional formations of striving: this is called the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to investigation and volitional formations of striving.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.13-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 268 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.13]]
> ◄  [[sn51.12-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.14-bodhi]] ►
