---
sutta_code: "SN51.10"
sutta_title:
  - "Cetiyasutta "
  - "The Shrine"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.10]]
> ◄  [[sn51.9-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.11-bodhi]] ►

# SN51.10 The Shrine

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof. \[259\] Then, in the morning, the Blessed One dressed and, taking bowl and robe, entered Vesālī for alms. When he had walked for alms in Vesālī and had returned from the alms round, after his meal he addressed the Venerable Ānanda thus:

“Take a sitting cloth, Ānanda. Let us go to the Cāpāla Shrine for the day’s abiding.”

“Yes, venerable sir,” the Venerable Ānanda replied and, having taken a sitting cloth, he followed closely behind the Blessed One. The Blessed One then went to the Cāpāla Shrine and sat down on a seat that was prepared. The Venerable Ānanda, having paid homage to the Blessed One, also sat down to one side. The Blessed One then said to the Venerable Ānanda:

“Delightful is Vesālī, Ānanda. Delightful is the Udena Shrine, delightful the Gotamaka Shrine, delightful the Sattamba Shrine, delightful the Bahuputta Shrine, delightful the Sārandada Shrine, delightful the Cāpāla Shrine. Whoever, Ānanda, has developed and cultivated the four bases for spiritual power, made them a vehicle, made them a basis, stabilized them, exercised himself in them, and fully perfected them could, if he so wished, live on for the aeon or for the remainder of the aeon. The Tathāgata, Ānanda, has developed and cultivated the four bases for spiritual power, made them a vehicle, made them a basis, stabilized them, exercised himself in them, and fully perfected them. If he so wished, the Tathāgata could live on for the aeon or for the remainder of the aeon.”

But though the Venerable Ānanda was given such an obvious signal by the Blessed One, though he was given such an obvious hint, he was unable to penetrate it. He did not implore the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, let the Blessed One live on for the aeon! Let the Fortunate One live on for the aeon, for the welfare of the multitude, for the happiness of the multitude, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of devas and humans.” To such an extent was his mind obsessed by Māra.

A second time … \[260\] A third time the Blessed One addressed the Venerable Ānanda: “Delightful is Vesālī, Ānanda…. Whoever, Ānanda, has developed and cultivated the four bases for spiritual power … could, if he so wished, live on for the aeon or for the remainder of the aeon…. If he so wished, the Tathāgata could live on for the aeon or for the remainder of the aeon.”

But again, though the Venerable Ānanda was given such an obvious signal by the Blessed One, though he was given such an obvious hint, he was unable to penetrate it…. To such an extent was his mind obsessed by Māra.

Then the Blessed One addressed the Venerable Ānanda: “You may go, Ānanda, at your own convenience.”

“Yes, venerable sir,” the Venerable Ānanda replied, and he rose from his seat, paid homage to the Blessed One, and, keeping his right side towards him, sat down nearby at the foot of a tree.

Then, not long after the Venerable Ānanda had left, Māra the Evil One approached the Blessed One and said to him: “Venerable sir, let the Blessed One now attain final Nibbāna! Let the Fortunate One now attain final Nibbāna! Now is the time for the Blessed One’s final Nibbāna! This statement was made, venerable sir, by the Blessed One: \[261\] ‘I will not attain final Nibbāna, Evil One, until I have bhikkhu disciples who are wise, disciplined, confident, secure from bondage, learned, upholders of the Dhamma, practising in accordance with the Dhamma, practising in the proper way, conducting themselves accordingly; who have learned their own teacher’s doctrine and can explain it, teach it, proclaim it, establish it, disclose it, analyse it, and elucidate it; who can refute thoroughly with reasons the prevalent tenets of others and can teach the efficacious Dhamma.’ But at present, venerable sir, the Blessed One has bhikkhu disciples who are wise … and who can teach the efficacious Dhamma. Venerable sir, let the Blessed One now attain final Nibbāna! Let the Fortunate One now attain final Nibbāna! Now is the time for the Blessed One’s final Nibbāna!

“And this statement was made, venerable sir, by the Blessed One: ‘I will not attain final Nibbāna, Evil One, until I have bhikkhunī disciples … until I have male lay disciples … until I have female lay disciples who are wise … and who can teach the efficacious Dhamma.’ But at present, venerable sir, the Blessed One has female lay disciples who are wise, disciplined, confident, secure from bondage, learned, upholders of the Dhamma, practising in accordance with the Dhamma, \[262\] practising in the proper way, conducting themselves accordingly; who have learned their own teacher’s doctrine and can explain it, teach it, proclaim it, establish it, disclose it, analyse it, and elucidate it; who can refute thoroughly with reasons the prevalent tenets of others and can teach the efficacious Dhamma. Venerable sir, let the Blessed One now attain final Nibbāna! Let the Fortunate One now attain final Nibbāna! Now is the time for the Blessed One’s final Nibbāna!

“And this statement was made, venerable sir, by the Blessed One: ‘I will not attain final Nibbāna, Evil One, until this holy life of mine has become successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, well proclaimed among devas and humans.’ That holy life of the Blessed One, venerable sir, has become successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, well proclaimed among devas and humans. Venerable sir, let the Blessed One now attain final Nibbāna! Let the Fortunate One now attain final Nibbāna! Now is the time for the Blessed One’s final Nibbāna!”

When this was said, the Blessed One said to Māra the Evil One: “Be at ease, Evil One. It will not be long before the Tathāgata’s final Nibbāna takes place. Three months from now the Tathāgata will attain final Nibbāna.”

Then the Blessed One, at the Cāpāla Shrine, mindfully and with clear comprehension relinquished his vital formation. And when the Blessed One had relinquished his vital formation, a great earthquake occurred, frightening and terrifying, and peals of thunder shook the sky.

Then, having understood the meaning of this, the Blessed One on that occasion uttered this inspired utterance: \[263\]

> “Comparing the incomparable and continued existence,  
>   
> The sage relinquished the formation of existence.  
>   
> Rejoicing within, collected, he broke  
>   
> Continued self-existence like a coat of armour.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.10-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA42.5]], [[MA36]] | S v 258 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[UD6.1]], [[DN16]], [[AN8.70]], [[AN8.68-70]], [[DA2]], [[UD8.5]], [[UD8.6]], [[MA36]], [[EA42.5]], [[PE3]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.10]]
> ◄  [[sn51.9-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.11-bodhi]] ►
