---
sutta_code: "SN51.15"
sutta_title:
  - "Uṇṇābhabrāhmaṇasutta "
  - "The Brahmin Uṇṇabha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.15]]
> ◄  [[sn51.14-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.16-bodhi]] ►

# SN51.15 The Brahmin Uṇṇābha

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park. \[272\] Then the brahmin Uṇṇābha approached the Venerable Ānanda and exchanged greetings with him. When they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to the Venerable Ānanda: “For what purpose, Master Ānanda, is the holy life lived under the ascetic Gotama?”

“It is for the sake of abandoning desire, brahmin, that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One.”

“But, Master Ānanda, is there a path, is there a way for the abandoning of this desire?”

“There is a path, brahmin, there is a way for the abandoning of this desire.”

  
  

“But, Master Ānanda, what is the path, what is the way for the abandoning of this desire?”

“Here, brahmin, a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to desire and volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to energy … samādhi due to mind … samādhi due to investigation and volitional formations of striving. This, brahmin, is the path, this is the way for the abandoning of this desire.”

“Such being the case, Master Ānanda, the situation is interminable, not terminable. It is impossible that one can abandon desire by means of desire itself.”

“Well then, brahmin, I will question you about this matter. Answer as you see fit. What do you think, brahmin, did you earlier have the desire, ‘I will go to the park,’ and after you went to the park, did the corresponding desire subside?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Did you earlier arouse energy, thinking, ‘I will go to the park,’ and after you went to the park, did the corresponding energy subside?” \[273\]

“Yes, sir.”

“Did you earlier make up your mind, ‘I will go to the park,’ and after you went to the park, did the corresponding resolution  subside?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Did you earlier make an investigation, ‘Shall I go to the park?’ and after you went to the park, did the corresponding investigation subside?”

“Yes, sir.”

“It is exactly the same, brahmin, with a bhikkhu who is an arahant, one whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, utterly destroyed the fetters of existence, and is completely liberated through final knowledge. He earlier had the desire for the attainment of arahantship, and when he attained arahantship, the corresponding desire subsided. He earlier had aroused energy for the attainment of arahantship, and when he attained arahantship, the corresponding energy subsided. He earlier had made up his mind to attain arahantship, and when he attained arahantship, the corresponding resolution subsided. He earlier made an investigation for the attainment of arahantship, and when he attained arahantship, the corresponding investigation subsided.

“What do you think, brahmin, such being the case, is the situation terminable or interminable?”

“Surely, Master Ānanda, such being the case, the situation is terminable, not interminable. Magnificent, Master Ānanda!… From today let Master Ānanda remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.15-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA561]] | S v 271 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA561]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN48:42.ANII145]], [[AN35]], [[AN36]], [[AN37]], [[AN38]], [[AN39]], [[AN40]], [[AN41]], [[AN42]], [[AN43]], [[AN44]], [[AN45]], [[AN46]], [[AN47]], [[AN48]], [[AN49]], [[AN50]], [[AN51]], [[AN52]], [[AN53]], [[AN54]], [[AN55]], [[AN56]], [[AN57]], [[AN58]], [[AN59]], [[AN60]], [[AN61]], [[AN62]], [[AN63]], [[AN64]], [[AN65]], [[AN66]], [[AN67]], [[AN68]], [[AN69]], [[AN70]], [[AN71]], [[AN72]], [[AN73]], [[AN74]], [[AN75]], [[AN76]], [[AN77]], [[AN78]], [[AN79]], [[AN80]], [[AN81]], [[AN82]], [[AN83]], [[AN84]], [[AN85]], [[AN86]], [[AN87]], [[AN88]], [[AN89]], [[AN90]], [[AN91]], [[AN92]], [[AN93]], [[AN94]], [[AN95]], [[AN96]], [[AN97]], [[AN98]], [[AN99]], [[AN100]], [[AN101]], [[AN102]], [[AN103]], [[AN104]], [[AN105]], [[AN106]], [[AN107]], [[AN108]], [[AN109]], [[AN110]], [[AN111]], [[AN112]], [[AN113]], [[AN114]], [[AN115]], [[AN116]], [[AN117]], [[AN118]], [[AN119]], [[AN120]], [[AN121]], [[AN122]], [[AN123]], [[AN124]], [[AN125]], [[AN126]], [[AN127]], [[AN128]], [[AN129]], [[AN130]], [[AN131]], [[AN132]], [[AN133]], [[AN134]], [[AN135]], [[AN136]], [[AN137]], [[AN138]], [[AN139]], [[AN140]], [[AN141]], [[AN142]], [[AN143]], [[AN144]], [[AN145]], [[AN146]], [[AN21]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.15]]
> ◄  [[sn51.14-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.16-bodhi]] ►
