---
sutta_code: "SN51.19"
sutta_title:
  - "Iddhādidesanāsutta "
  - "A Teaching"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.19]]
> ◄  [[sn51.18-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.20-bodhi]] ►

# SN51.19 A Teaching

“Bhikkhus, I will teach you spiritual power, the basis for spiritual power, the development of the bases for spiritual power, and the way leading to the development of the bases for spiritual power.

“And what, bhikkhus, is spiritual power? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu wields the various kinds of spiritual power: having been one, he becomes many … he exercises mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world. This is called spiritual power.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the basis for spiritual power? It is the path and practice that leads to gaining spiritual power, to obtaining spiritual power. This is called the basis for spiritual power.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the development of the bases for spiritual power? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to desire and volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to energy … samādhi due to mind … samādhi due to investigation and volitional formations of striving. This is called the development of the bases for spiritual power.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the way leading to the development of the bases for spiritual power? It is this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right samādhi. This is called the way leading to the development of the bases for spiritual power.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 275 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.19]]
> ◄  [[sn51.18-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.20-bodhi]] ►
