---
sutta_code: "SN51.26"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyaphalasutta "
  - "Fruits (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.26]]
> ◄  [[sn51.25-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.27-bodhi]] ►

# SN51.26 Fruits (2)

“Bhikkhus, there are these four bases for spiritual power. What four? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to desire and volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to energy … samādhi due to mind … samādhi due to investigation and volitional formations of striving. These are the four bases for spiritual power.

“When, bhikkhus, these four bases for spiritual power have been developed and cultivated, seven fruits and benefits may be expected. What are the seven fruits and benefits?

“One attains final knowledge early in this very life. If one does not attain final knowledge early in this very life, then one attains final knowledge at the time of death. If one does not attain final knowledge early in this very life, or at the time of death, then with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters one becomes an attainer of Nibbāna in the interval … an attainer of Nibbāna upon landing … an attainer of Nibbāna without exertion … an attainer of Nibbāna with exertion … one bound upstream, heading towards the Akaniṭṭha realm.

“When, bhikkhus, these four bases for spiritual power have been developed and cultivated, these seven fruits and benefits may be expected.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.26-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 285 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.26]]
> ◄  [[sn51.25-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.27-bodhi]] ►
