---
sutta_code: "SN51.14"
sutta_title:
  - "Moggallānasutta "
  - "Moggallana"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.14]]
> ◄  [[sn51.13-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.15-bodhi]] ►

# SN51.14 Moggallāna

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in the Eastern Park in the Mansion of Migāra’s Mother. Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus who dwelt on the ground floor of the mansion were restless, puffed up, personally vain, rough-tongued, rambling in their talk, muddle-minded, without clear comprehension, uncollected, scatter-brained, loose in their faculties.

Then the Blessed One addressed the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna thus: “Moggallāna, your brothers in the holy life, \[270\] dwelling on the ground floor of the Mansion of Migāra’s Mother, are restless … loose in their faculties. Go, Moggallāna, stir up a sense of urgency in those bhikkhus.”

“Yes, venerable sir,” the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna replied. Then he performed a feat of spiritual power such that he made the Mansion of Migāra’s Mother shake, quake, and tremble with his toe. Then those bhikkhus, shocked and terrified, stood to one side and said: “It is wonderful indeed, sir! It is amazing indeed, sir! There is no wind, and this Mansion of Migāra’s Mother has a deep base and is securely planted, immobile, unshaking; yet it shook, quaked, and trembled.”

Then the Blessed One approached those bhikkhus and said to them: “Why, bhikkhus, are you standing to one side, shocked and terrified?”

“It is wonderful, venerable sir! It is amazing, venerable sir! There is no wind, and this Mansion of Migāra’s Mother has a deep base and is securely planted, immobile, unshaking; yet it shook, it quaked, it trembled.”

“Bhikkhus, the bhikkhu Moggallāna, desiring to stir up a sense of urgency in you, made the Mansion of Migāra’s Mother shake, quake, and tremble with his toe. What do you think, bhikkhus, by having developed and cultivated what things has the bhikkhu Moggallāna become so powerful and mighty?”

“Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One. It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement. Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will remember it.” \[271\]

“Then listen, bhikkhus…. It is because he has developed and cultivated the four bases for spiritual power that the bhikkhu Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty. What four? Here, bhikkhus, the bhikkhu Moggallāna has developed the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to desire and volitional formations of striving. He has developed the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to energy … samādhi due to mind … samādhi due to investigation and volitional formations of striving, thinking: ‘Thus my investigation will be neither too slack nor too tense; and it will be neither constricted internally nor distracted externally. ’… Thus, with a mind that is open and unenveloped, he has developed the mind imbued with luminosity.

“It is, bhikkhus, because he has developed and cultivated these four bases for spiritual power that the bhikkhu Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty.

“It is, bhikkhus, because the bhikkhu Moggallāna has developed and cultivated these four bases for spiritual power that he wields the various kinds of spiritual power … he exercises mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world….

“It is, bhikkhus, because the bhikkhu Moggallāna has developed and cultivated these four bases for spiritual power that by the destruction of the taints, in this very life he enters and dwells in the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, realizing it for himself with direct knowledge.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.14-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 269 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.14]]
> ◄  [[sn51.13-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.15-bodhi]] ►
