---
sutta_code: "SN51.20"
sutta_title:
  - "Vibhaṅgasutta "
  - "Analysis"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.20]]
> ◄  [[sn51.19-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.21-bodhi]] ►

# SN51.20 Analysis

“Bhikkhus, these four bases for spiritual power, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit.

“And how, bhikkhus, are the four bases for spiritual power developed and cultivated so that they are of great fruit and benefit?

“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to desire and volitional formations of striving, thinking: ‘Thus my desire \[277\] will be neither too slack nor too tense; and it will be neither constricted internally nor distracted externally.’ And he dwells perceiving after and before: ‘As before, so after; as after, so before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so at night; as at night, so by day.’ Thus, with a mind that is open and unenveloped, he develops the mind imbued with luminosity.

“He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to energy … samādhi due to mind … samādhi due to investigation … he develops the mind imbued with luminosity.

### (i. Analysis of desire as a basis)

“And what, bhikkhus, is desire that is too slack? It is desire that is accompanied by lassitude, associated with lassitude. This is called desire that is too slack.

“And what, bhikkhus, is desire that is too tense? It is desire that is accompanied by restlessness, associated with restlessness. This is called desire that is too tense.

“And what, bhikkhus, is desire that is constricted internally? It is desire that is accompanied by sloth and torpor, associated with sloth and torpor. This is called desire that is constricted internally.

“And what, bhikkhus, is desire that is distracted externally? It is desire that is repeatedly distracted externally, repeatedly disturbed, on account of the five cords of sensual pleasure. This is called desire that is distracted externally.

“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu dwell perceiving after and before: ‘As before, so after; as after, so before’? \[278\] Here, bhikkhus, the perception of after and before is well grasped by a bhikkhu, well attended to, well considered, well penetrated by wisdom. It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu dwells perceiving after and before: ‘As before, so after; as after, so before.’

“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu dwell ‘as below, so above; as above, so below’? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this very body upwards from the soles of the feet, downwards from the tips of the hairs, enclosed in skin, as full of many kinds of impurities: ‘There are in this body head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, pleura, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, excrement, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, fluid of the joints, urine.’ It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu dwells ‘as below, so above; as above, so below.’

  
  

“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu dwell ‘as by day, so at night; as at night, so by day’? Here, bhikkhus, at night a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to desire and volitional formations of striving by way of the same qualities, the same features, the same aspects, as he develops that basis for spiritual power by day. Or else by day he develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to desire and volitional formations of striving by way of the same qualities, the same features, the same aspects, as he develops that basis for spiritual power at night. It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu dwells ‘as by day, so at night; as at night, so by day.’

“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu, with a mind that is open and unenveloped, develop the mind imbued with luminosity? Here, bhikkhus, the perception of light is well grasped by a bhikkhu; the perception of day is well resolved upon. It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu, with a mind that is open and unenveloped, develops the mind imbued with luminosity. \[279\]

### (ii. Analysis of energy as a basis)

“And what, bhikkhus, is energy that it too slack? It is energy that is accompanied by lassitude, associated with lassitude. This is called energy that is too slack.

“And what, bhikkhus, is energy that is too tense? It is energy that is accompanied by restlessness, associated with restlessness. This is called energy that is too tense.

“And what, bhikkhus, is energy that is constricted internally? It is energy that is accompanied by sloth and torpor, associated with sloth and torpor. This is called energy that is constricted internally.

“And what, bhikkhus, is energy that is distracted externally? It is energy that is repeatedly distracted externally, repeatedly disturbed, on account of the five cords of sensual pleasure. This is called energy that is distracted externally … (all as above) …

“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu, with a mind that is open and unenveloped, develops the mind imbued with luminosity.

### (iii. Analysis of mind as a basis)

“And what, bhikkhus, is mind that is too slack? It is mind that is accompanied by lassitude, associated with lassitude. This is called mind that is too slack.

“And what, bhikkhus, is mind that is too tense? It is mind that is accompanied by restlessness, associated with restlessness. This is called mind that is too tense.

“And what, bhikkhus, is mind that is constricted internally? It is mind that is accompanied by sloth and torpor, associated with sloth and torpor. This is called mind that is constricted internally. \[280\]

“And what, bhikkhus, is mind that is distracted externally? It is mind that is repeatedly distracted externally, repeatedly disturbed, on account of the five cords of sensual pleasure. This is called mind that is distracted externally … (all as above) …

“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu, with a mind that is open and unenveloped, develops the mind imbued with luminosity.

### (iv. Analysis of investigation as a basis)

“And what, bhikkhus, is investigation that is too slack? It is investigation that is accompanied by lassitude, associated with lassitude. This is called investigation that is too slack.

“And what, bhikkhus, is investigation that is too tense? It is investigation that is accompanied by restlessness, associated with restlessness. This is called investigation that is too tense.

“And what, bhikkhus, is investigation that is constricted internally? It is investigation that is accompanied by sloth and torpor, associated with sloth and torpor. This is called investigation that is constricted internally.

“And what, bhikkhus, is investigation that is distracted externally? It is investigation that is repeatedly distracted externally, repeatedly disturbed, on account of the five cords of sensual pleasure. This is called investigation that is distracted externally … (all as above) …

“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu, with a mind that is open and unenveloped, develops the mind imbued with luminosity.

“When, bhikkhus, the four bases for spiritual power have been developed and cultivated in this way, they are of great fruit and benefit.

“When, bhikkhus, the four bases for spiritual power have been developed and cultivated in this way, a bhikkhu wields the various kinds of spiritual power: having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one … he exercises mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world….

“When, bhikkhus, the four bases for spiritual power have been developed and cultivated in this way, a bhikkhu, by the destruction of the taints, \[281\] in this very life enters and dwells in the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, realizing it for himself with direct knowledge.”

(The six direct knowledges should be elaborated.)


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn51.20-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 276 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN51]]  / 🌐 [[SN51.20]]
> ◄  [[sn51.19-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn51.21-bodhi]] ►
