---
sutta_code: "AN4.198"
sutta_title:
  - "Attantapa "
  - "Self-Mortification"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN4]]  / 🌐 [[AN4.198]]
> ◄  [[an4.197-bodhi]] 📜  [[an4.199-bodhi]] ►

# AN4.198 Self-Torment

> **Division:** V. THE GREAT CHAPTER

“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world. What four? (1) Here, a certain kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself. (2) But another kind of person torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others. (3) Still another kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself, and also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others. (4) And still another kind of person does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself, \[206\] and does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others. Since he torments neither himself nor others, in this very life he dwells hungerless, quenched and cooled, experiencing bliss, having himself become divine.

(1) “And how, bhikkhus, is a person one who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself? Here, a certain person goes naked, rejecting conventions, licking his hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when asked; he does not accept food brought or food specially made or an invitation to a meal; he receives nothing from a pot, from a bowl, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman nursing a child, from a woman being kept by a man, from where food is advertised to be distributed, from where a dog is waiting, from where flies are buzzing; he accepts no fish or meat, he drinks no liquor, wine, or fermented brew. He keeps to one house \[on alms round\], to one morsel of food; he keeps to two houses, to two morsels … he keeps to seven houses, to seven morsels. He lives on one saucer a day, on two saucers a day … on seven saucers a day. He takes food once a day, once every two days … once every seven days; thus even up to once every fortnight, he dwells pursuing the practice of taking food at stated intervals.

“He is an eater of greens or millet or forest rice or hide-parings or moss or rice bran or rice scum or sesame flour or grass or cow dung. He subsists on forest roots and fruits; he feeds on fallen fruits.

“He wears hemp robes, robes of hemp-mixed cloth, robes made from shrouds, rag-robes, tree bark, antelope hides, strips of antelope hide, robes of _kusa_ grass, bark fabric, or wood-shavings fabric; a mantle made of head hair or of animal wool, a covering made of owls’ wings.

“He is one who pulls out hair and beard, pursuing the practice of pulling out hair and beard. He is one who stands continuously, rejecting seats. He is one who squats continuously, devoted to maintaining the squatting position. He is one who uses a mattress of thorns; he makes a mattress of thorns his bed. He dwells pursuing the practice of bathing in water three times daily including the evening. \[207\] Thus in such a variety of ways he dwells pursuing the practice of tormenting and mortifying the body. It is in this way that a person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.

(2) “And how is a person one who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others? Here, a certain person is a butcher of sheep, a butcher of pigs, a fowler, a trapper of wild beasts, a hunter, a fisherman, a thief, an executioner, a prison warden, or one who follows any other such bloody occupation. It is in this way that a person is one who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.

(3) “And how is a person one who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself and also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others? Here, some person is a head-anointed khattiya king or an affluent brahmin. Having had a new sacrificial temple built to the east of the city, and having shaved off his hair and beard, dressed himself in rough antelope hide, and greased his body with ghee and oil, scratching his back with a deer’s horn, he enters the sacrificial temple together with his chief queen and his brahmin high priest. There he lies down on the bare ground strewn with grass. The king lives on the milk in the first teat of a cow with a calf of the same color while the chief queen lives on the milk in the second teat and the brahmin high priest lives on the milk in the third teat; the milk in the fourth teat they pour onto the fire, and the calf lives on what is left. He says: ‘Let so many bulls be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many bullocks be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many heifers be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many goats be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many sheep be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many trees be felled for the sacrificial posts, let so much grass be cut for the sacrificial grass.’ \[208\] And then his slaves, messengers, and servants make preparations, weeping with tearful faces, being spurred on by threats of punishment and by fear. It is in this way that a person is one who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself and who also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.

(4) “And how is a person one who does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself and does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others—the one who, since he torments neither himself nor others, in this very life dwells hungerless, quenched and cooled, experiencing bliss, having himself become divine?

“Here, bhikkhus, the Tathāgata arises in the world, an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One. Having realized with his own direct knowledge this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, with its devas and humans, he makes it known to others. He teaches the Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life.

“A householder or householder’s son or one born in some other clan hears this Dhamma. He then acquires faith in the Tathāgata and considers thus: ‘Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide open. It is not easy, while living at home, to lead the spiritual life that is utterly perfect and pure as a polished conch shell. Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into homelessness.’ On a later occasion, having abandoned a small or a large fortune, having abandoned a small or a large circle of relatives, he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on ochre robes, and goes forth from the household life into homelessness.

“Having thus gone forth and possessing the bhikkhus’ training and way of life, having abandoned the destruction of life, he abstains from the destruction of life; with the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, he dwells compassionate toward all living beings. Having abandoned the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given; \[209\] he takes only what is given, expects only what is given, and dwells honestly without thoughts of theft. Having abandoned sexual activity, he observes celibacy, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.

“Having abandoned false speech, he abstains from false speech; he speaks truth, adheres to truth; he is trustworthy and reliable, no deceiver of the world. Having abandoned divisive speech, he abstains from divisive speech; he does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide \[those people\] from these, nor does he repeat to these what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide \[these people\] from those; thus he is one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter of unity, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker of words that promote concord. Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech; he speaks words that are gentle, pleasing to the ear, lovable, words that go to the heart, courteous words that are desired by many people and agreeable to many people. Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter; he speaks at a proper time, speaks what is truthful, speaks what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline; at the proper time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

“He abstains from injuring seeds and plants. He eats once a day, abstaining from eating at night and outside the proper time. He abstains from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and unsuitable shows. He abstains from adorning and beautifying himself by wearing garlands and applying scents and unguents. He abstains from high and large beds. He abstains from accepting gold and silver, raw grain, raw meat, women and girls, men and women slaves, goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares, fields and land. He abstains from going on errands and running messages; from buying and selling; from cheating with weights, metals, and measures; from accepting bribes, deceiving, defrauding, and trickery. He abstains from wounding, murdering, binding, brigandage, plunder, and violence.

“He is content with robes to protect his body and almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes he sets out taking only these with him. Just as a bird, wherever it goes, \[210\] flies with its wings as its only burden, so too, a bhikkhu is content with robes to protect his body and almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes he sets out taking only these with him. Possessing this aggregate of noble virtuous behavior, he experiences blameless bliss within himself.

“Having seen a form with the eye, he does not grasp at its marks and features. Since, if he left the eye faculty unrestrained, bad unwholesome states of longing and dejection might invade him, he practices restraint over it; he guards the eye faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty. Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he does not grasp at its marks and features. Since, if he left the mind faculty unrestrained, bad unwholesome states of longing and dejection might invade him, he practices restraint over it; he guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the mind faculty. Possessing this noble restraint of the faculties, he experiences unsullied bliss within himself.

“He acts with clear comprehension when going forward and returning; he acts with clear comprehension when looking ahead and looking away; he acts with clear comprehension when bending and stretching his limbs; he acts with clear comprehension when wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; he acts with clear comprehension when eating, drinking, consuming food, and tasting; he acts with clear comprehension when defecating and urinating; he acts with clear comprehension when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.

“Possessing this aggregate of noble virtuous behavior, and this noble restraint of the faculties, and this noble mindfulness and clear comprehension, he resorts to a secluded lodging: the forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.

“After his meal, on returning from his alms round, he sits down, folding his legs crosswise, straightening his body, and establishing mindfulness in front of him. Having abandoned longing for the world, he dwells with a mind free from longing; he purifies his mind from longing. Having abandoned ill will and hatred, he dwells with a mind free from ill will, compassionate toward all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill will and hatred. Having abandoned dullness and drowsiness, \[211\] he dwells free from dullness and drowsiness, percipient of light, mindful and clearly comprehending; he purifies his mind from dullness and drowsiness. Having abandoned restlessness and remorse, he dwells without agitation, with a mind inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and remorse. Having abandoned doubt, he dwells having gone beyond doubt, unperplexed about wholesome qualities; he purifies his mind from doubt.

“Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, defilements of the mind, qualities that weaken wisdom, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination. With the subsiding of thought and examination, he enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has internal placidity and unification of mind and consists of rapture and pleasure born of samādhi, without thought and examination. With the fading away as well of rapture, he dwells equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, he experiences pleasure with the body; he enters and dwells in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’ With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, he enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.

“When his mind has been collected in this way, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of the recollection of past abodes … \[as in 3:58 §1\] … to the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings … \[as in 3:58 §2\] … to the knowledge of the destruction of the taints. He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’ He understands as it really is: ‘These are the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’

“When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensuality, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘\[It’s\] liberated.’ He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.’

“It is in this way that a person is one who does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself and who does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others—one who, since he torments neither himself nor others, in this very life dwells hungerless, quenched and cooled, experiencing bliss, having himself become divine.

“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an4.198-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A ii 205 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MN101]], [[MN27]], [[MN38]], [[MN51]], [[MN94]], [[SN35.120]], [[DN2]], [[DN3]], [[DN4]], [[DN5]], [[DN6]], [[DN7]], [[DN8]], [[DN9]], [[DN10]], [[DN11]], [[DN12]], [[DN13]], [[MN53]], [[MN60]], [[MN76]], [[MN79]], [[MN107]], [[MN112]], [[AN4.14]], [[AN4.165]], [[AN5.76]], [[AN5.140]], [[AN10.99]], [[AN11.17]], [[MN39]], [[SN35.127]], [[SN35.240]], [[AN3.16]], [[AN4.37]], [[MN33]], [[DN25]], [[MN12]], [[MN45]], [[AN3.156-162]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN4]]  / 🌐 [[AN4.198]]
> ◄  [[an4.197-bodhi]] 📜  [[an4.199-bodhi]] ►
