---
sutta_code: "SN54.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Vesālīsutta "
  - "At Vesali"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.9]]
> ◄  [[sn54.8-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn54.10-bodhi]] ►

# SN54.9 At Vesālī

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof. Now on that occasion the Blessed One was giving the bhikkhus a talk on foulness in many ways, was speaking in praise of foulness, was speaking in praise of the development of foulness meditation.

Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, I wish to go into seclusion for half a month. I should not be approached by anyone except the one who brings me almsfood.”

“Yes, venerable sir,” those bhikkhus replied, and no one approached the Blessed One except the one who brought him almsfood.

Then those bhikkhus, thinking: “The Blessed One was giving a talk on foulness in many ways, was speaking in praise of foulness, was speaking in praise of the development of foulness meditation,” dwelt devoted to the development of foulness meditation in its many aspects and factors. Being repelled, humiliated, and disgusted with this body, they sought for an assailant. In one day ten bhikkhus used the knife, or in one day twenty or thirty bhikkhus used the knife.

Then, when that half-month had passed, the Blessed One emerged from seclusion and addressed the Venerable Ānanda: “Why, Ānanda, does the Bhikkhu Saṅgha look so diminished?” 

“Venerable sir, that is because \[the Blessed One had given a talk on foulness in many ways, had spoken in praise of foulness, \[321\] had spoken in praise of the development of foulness meditation, and those bhikkhus,\] thinking: ‘The Blessed One was giving a talk on foulness in many ways, was speaking in praise of foulness, was speaking in praise of the development of foulness meditation,’ dwelt devoted to the development of foulness meditation in its many aspects and factors. Being repelled, humiliated, and disgusted with this body, they sought for an assailant. In one day ten bhikkhus used the knife, or in one day twenty or thirty bhikkhus used the knife. It would be good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One would explain another method so that this Bhikkhu Saṅgha may be established in final knowledge.”

“Well then, Ānanda, assemble in the attendance hall all the bhikkhus who are living in dependence on Vesālī.”

“Yes, venerable sir,” the Venerable Ānanda replied, and he assembled in the attendance hall all the bhikkhus who were living in dependence on Vesālī, as many as there were. Then he approached the Blessed One and said to him: “The Bhikkhu Saṅgha has assembled, venerable sir. Let the Blessed One come at his own convenience.”

Then the Blessed One went to the attendance hall, sat down in the appointed seat, and addressed the bhikkhus thus:

“Bhikkhus, this samādhi by mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, is peaceful and sublime, an ambrosial pleasant dwelling, and it disperses and quells right on the spot evil unwholesome states whenever they arise.

“Just as, bhikkhus, in the last month of the hot season, when a mass of dust and dirt has swirled up, a great rain cloud out of season disperses it and quells it on the spot, so too samādhi by mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, is peaceful and sublime, \[322\] an ambrosial pleasant dwelling, and it disperses and quells on the spot evil unwholesome states whenever they arise. And how is this so?

“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, sits down. Having folded his legs crosswise, straightened his body, and set up mindfulness in front of him, just mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out…. He trains thus: ‘Contemplating relinquishment, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Contemplating relinquishment, I will breathe out.’

“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that samādhi by mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated so that it is peaceful and sublime, an ambrosial pleasant dwelling, and it disperses and quells on the spot evil unwholesome states whenever they arise.”

10 (10) Kimbila

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kimbilā in the Bamboo Grove. There the Blessed One addressed the Venerable Kimbila thus: “How is it now, Kimbila, that samādhi by mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated so that it is of great fruit and benefit?”

When this was said, the Venerable Kimbila was silent. A second time…A third time the Blessed One addressed the Venerable Kimbila: “How is it now, Kimbila, that samādhi by mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated so that it is of great fruit and benefit?” A third time the Venerable Kimbila was silent. \[323\]

When this happened, the Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Now is the time for this, Blessed One! Now is the time for this, Fortunate One! The Blessed One should speak on samādhi by mindfulness of breathing. Having heard it from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will remember it.”

“Well then, Ānanda, listen and attend closely, I will speak.”

“Yes, venerable sir,” the Venerable Ānanda replied. The Blessed One said this:

“And how, Ānanda, is samādhi by mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so that it is of great fruit and benefit? Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, sits down. Having folded his legs crosswise, straightened his body, and set up mindfulness in front of him, just mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out…. He trains thus: ‘Contemplating relinquishment, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Contemplating relinquishment, I will breathe out.’

### (i. Contemplation of the body)

“Whenever, Ānanda, a bhikkhu, when breathing in long, knows: ‘I breathe in long’; or, when breathing out long, knows: ‘I breathe out long’; when breathing in short, knows: ‘I breathe in short’; or, when breathing out short, knows: ‘I breathe out short’; when he trains thus: ‘Experiencing the whole body, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Experiencing the whole body, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Tranquillizing the bodily formation, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Tranquillizing the bodily formation, I will breathe out’—on that occasion the bhikkhu dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. For what reason? I call this a certain kind of body, Ānanda, that is, breathing in and breathing out. Therefore, Ānanda, on that occasion the bhikkhu dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world.

### (ii. Contemplation of feelings)

“Whenever, Ānanda, a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘Experiencing rapture, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Experiencing rapture, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Experiencing happiness, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Experiencing happiness, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Experiencing the mental formation, \[324\] I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Experiencing the mental formation, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Tranquillizing the mental formation, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Tranquillizing the mental formation, I will breathe out’—on that occasion the bhikkhu dwells contemplating feelings in feelings, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. For what reason? I call this a certain kind of feeling, Ānanda, that is, close attention to breathing in and breathing out. Therefore, Ānanda, on that occasion the bhikkhu dwells contemplating feelings in feelings, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world.

### (iii. Contemplation of mind)

“Whenever, Ānanda, a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘Experiencing the mind, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Experiencing the mind, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Gladdening the mind, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Gladdening the mind, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Concentrating the mind, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Concentrating the mind, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Liberating the mind, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Liberating the mind, I will breathe out’—on that occasion the bhikkhu dwells contemplating mind in mind, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. For what reason? I say, Ānanda, that there is no development of samādhi by mindfulness of breathing for one who is muddled and who lacks clear comprehension. Therefore, Ānanda, on that occasion the bhikkhu dwells contemplating mind in mind, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world.

### (iv. Contemplation of phenomena)

“Whenever, Ānanda, a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘Contemplating impermanence, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Contemplating impermanence, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Contemplating fading away, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Contemplating fading away, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Contemplating cessation, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Contemplating cessation, I will breathe out’; when he trains thus: ‘Contemplating relinquishment, I will breathe in’; when he trains thus: ‘Contemplating relinquishment, I will breathe out’—on that occasion the bhikkhu dwells contemplating phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. Having seen with wisdom the abandoning of covetousness and displeasure, he is one who looks on closely with equanimity. Therefore, Ānanda, on that occasion the bhikkhu dwells contemplating phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure in regard to the world. \[325\]

“Suppose, Ānanda, at a crossroads there is a great mound of soil. If a cart or chariot comes from the east, west, north, or south, it would flatten that mound of soil. So too, Ānanda, when a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the body in the body, feelings in feelings, mind in mind, phenomena in phenomena, he flattens evil unwholesome states.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn54.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA809]] | S v 320 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA809]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN118]], [[SN54.8]], [[AN13]], [[MN44]], [[AN9.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.9]]
> ◄  [[sn54.8-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn54.10-bodhi]] ►
