---
sutta_code: "SN54.14"
sutta_title:
  - "DutiyĀnandasutta "
  - "Ānanda (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.14]]
> ◄  [[sn54.13-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn54.15-bodhi]] ►

# SN54.14 Ānanda (2)

Then the Venerable Ānanda approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. The Blessed One then said to the Venerable Ānanda:

“Ānanda, is there one thing which, when developed and cultivated, fulfils four things? And four things which, when developed and cultivated, fulfil seven things? And seven things which, when developed and cultivated, fulfil two things?”

“Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One….”

“There is, Ānanda, one thing which, when developed and cultivated, \[334\] fulfils four things; and four things which, when developed and cultivated, fulfil seven things; and seven things which, when developed and cultivated, fulfil two things.

“And what, Ānanda, is the one thing which, when developed and cultivated, fulfils four things; and the four things which, when developed and cultivated, fulfil seven things; and the seven things which, when developed and cultivated, fulfil two things? samādhi by mindfulness of breathing, Ānanda, is the one thing which, when developed and cultivated, fulfils the four establishments of mindfulness. The four establishments of mindfulness, when developed and cultivated, fulfil the seven factors of enlightenment. The seven factors of enlightenment, when developed and cultivated, fulfil true knowledge and liberation.

“And how, Ānanda, is samādhi by mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so that it fulfils the four establishments of mindfulness?

“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu, having gone to the forest … (all as in the preceding sutta down to:) … It is, Ānanda, when the seven factors of enlightenment are developed and cultivated in this way that they fulfil true knowledge and liberation.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn54.14-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA803]], [[SA810-812]], [[SA815]] | S v 333 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MN118]], [[SA815]], [[SA803]], [[SA810-812]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN118]], [[SN54.10]], [[MN44]], [[AN9.34]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN54]]  / 🌐 [[SN54.14]]
> ◄  [[sn54.13-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn54.15-bodhi]] ►
