---
sutta_code: "AN9.24"
sutta_title:
  - "Sattāvāsa "
  - "Abodes Of Sentient Beings"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN9]]  / 🌐 [[AN9.24]]
> ◄  [[an9.20-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an9.25-thanissaro]] ►

## AN9.24 Beings

## ## Sattā Sutta


“Monks, there are these nine abodes for beings. Which nine?

“There are beings with multiplicity of body & multiplicity of perception, such as human beings, some devas, and some beings in the lower realms. This is the first abode for beings.

“There are beings with multiplicity of body & singularity of perception,[1](#^[[an9-thanissaro]].24note01) such as the devas of Brahmā’s retinue generated by the first (jhāna).[2](#^[[an9-thanissaro]].24note02) This is the second abode for beings. ^[[an9-thanissaro]].24note01-ref ^[[an9-thanissaro]].24note02-ref

“There are beings with singularity of body & multiplicity of perception, such as the Radiant Devas. This is the third abode for beings.

“There are beings with singularity of body & singularity of perception, such as the Beautiful Black Devas. This is the fourth abode for beings.

“There are beings who are non-percipient, insensitive, such as the Non-percipient-being Devas. This is the fifth abode for beings.

“There are beings who, with the complete transcending of perceptions of (physical) form, with the disappearance of perceptions of resistance, and not attending to perceptions of multiplicity, (perceiving,) ‘Infinite space,’ arrive at the dimension of the infinitude of space. This is the sixth abode for beings.

“There are beings who, with the complete transcending of the dimension of the infinitude of space, (perceiving,) ‘Infinite consciousness,’ arrive at the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness. This is the seventh abode for beings.

“There are beings who, with the complete transcending of the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness, (perceiving,) ‘There is nothing,’ arrive at the dimension of nothingness. This is the eighth abode for beings.

“There are beings who, with the complete transcending of the dimension of nothingness, arrive at the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the ninth abode for beings.

“These, monks, are the nine abodes for beings.”

### Notes

1. [[mn137-thanissaro]] indicates that perceptions of multiplicity deal with the six senses, whereas perceptions of singularity act as the basis of the four formless attainments. Here, however, perceptions of singularity include the perceptions acting as the basis for the first jhāna. [↩︎](#^[[an9-thanissaro]].24note01-ref) ^[[an9-thanissaro]].24note01

2. The Thai edition of [[dn15-thanissaro]] adds here: “and (some) beings in the four realms of deprivation.” This phrase is not found in the Sri Lankan, Burmese, or PTS editions of [[dn15-thanissaro]], nor is it found in any of the editions of this sutta. However, without it there is nothing to cover the beings in the lower realms not included in the first abode for beings. They would appear to belong here or—if singularity of perception has to relate to the jhānas—to the following category. [↩︎](#^[[an9-thanissaro]].24note02-ref) ^[[an9-thanissaro]].24note02

See also: [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.86-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn23-thanissaro/sn23.2-thanissaro]]; [[sn44.9-thanissaro]]; 

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an9.24-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA44.1]] | A iv 401 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA44.1]], [[DN33]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DN33]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN9]]  / 🌐 [[AN9.24]]
> ◄  [[an9.20-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an9.25-thanissaro]] ►
