---
sutta_code: "AN11.13"
sutta_title:
  - "Nandiya "
  - "With Nandiya"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.13]]
> ◄  [[an11.12-bodhi]] 📜  [[an11.14-bodhi]] ►

# AN11.13 Nandiya

> **Division:** II. RECOLLECTION

On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park. Now on that occasion the Blessed One wanted to enter upon the rains residence in Sāvatthī. Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this and it then \[335\] occurred to him: “I will also enter upon the rains residence in Sāvatthī. There I will engage in business and from time to time get to see the Blessed One.”

Then the Blessed One entered upon the rains residence in Sāvatthī. Nandiya the Sakyan also entered upon the rains residence in Sāvatthī, where he engaged in business and from time to time got to see the Blessed One. Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were making a robe for the Blessed One, thinking that with his robe completed, at the end of the three months \[of the rains residence\], the Blessed One would set out wandering. Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this, approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Bhante, I have heard: ‘A number of bhikkhus are making a robe for the Blessed One, thinking that with his robe completed, at the end of the three months \[of the rains residence\], the Blessed One will set out wandering.’ Bhante, with all our various engagements, how should we dwell?”

“Good, good, Nandiya! It is fitting for you clansmen to approach the Tathāgata and ask: ‘Bhante, with all our various engagements, how should we dwell?’

(1) “Nandiya, a person with faith succeeds, not one without faith. (2) A virtuous person succeeds, not an immoral one. (3) An energetic person succeeds, not one who is lazy. (4) One with mindfulness established succeeds, not one who is muddle-minded. (5) One who is collected succeeds, not one who is uncollected. (6) One who is wise succeeds, not one who is unwise. Having established yourself in these six qualities, you should establish mindfulness internally concerning five things.

(7) “Here, Nandiya, you should recollect the Tathāgata thus: \[336\] ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’ Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on the Tathāgata.

(8) “Again, Nandiya, you should recollect the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’ Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on the Dhamma.

(9) “Again, Nandiya, you should recollect good friends thus: ‘It is truly my good fortune and gain that I have good friends who take compassion on me, who desire my good, who exhort and instruct me.’ Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on good friends.

(10) “Again, Nandiya, you should recollect your own generosity thus: ‘It is truly my good fortune and gain that in a population obsessed by the stain of miserliness, I dwell at home with a mind devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.’ Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on generosity.

(11) “Again, Nandiya, you should recollect the deities thus: ‘Those deities that have been reborn in a mind-made body in companionship with the devas who transcend those subsisting on edible food do not see in themselves anything still to be done or \[any need\] to increase what has been done. Just as a permanently liberated bhikkhu does not see in himself anything still to be done or \[any need\] to increase what has been done, so it is with those deities that have been reborn in a mind-made body in companionship with the devas who transcend those subsisting on edible food.’ \[337\] Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on the deities.

“Nandiya, a noble disciple who possesses these eleven qualities abandons bad unwholesome qualities and does not take them up. Just as a pot turned upside down does not receive back the water that has been poured out, and just as a fire that has gotten out of control advances burning up a dry woodland and does not return to what it has burnt, so too, a noble disciple who possesses these eleven qualities abandons bad unwholesome qualities and does not take them up.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an11.13-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA858]] | A v 334 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA858]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN6.10]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.13]]
> ◄  [[an11.12-bodhi]] 📜  [[an11.14-bodhi]] ►
