---
sutta_code: "AN11.19"
sutta_title:
  - "Samādhi "
  - "Immersion"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.19]]
> ◄  [[an11.18-bodhi]] 📜  [[an11.20-bodhi]] ►

# AN11.19 samādhi (2)

> **Division:** II. RECOLLECTION

There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: “Bhikkhus!”

“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

“Bhikkhus, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of samādhi that (1) he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth \[355\] … (11) of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient?”

“Bhante, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One. It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement. Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”

“Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely. I will speak.”

“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of samādhi that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth … he would not be percipient of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient.”

“But how, Bhante, could he obtain such a state of samādhi?”

“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is percipient thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’ It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of samādhi that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth … \[356\] … he would not be percipient of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an11.19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 354 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN9.36]], [[AN10.7]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.19]]
> ◄  [[an11.18-bodhi]] 📜  [[an11.20-bodhi]] ►
