---
sutta_code: "AN11.12"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyamahānāmamahānāma "
  - "With Mahānāma"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.12]]
> ◄  [[an11.11-bodhi]] 📜  [[an11.13-bodhi]] ►

# AN11.12 Mahānāma (2)

> **Division:** II. RECOLLECTION

\[Opening as in 11:11, down to:\] \[333\]

“Having established yourself in these five qualities, Mahānāma, you should further develop six things.

(6) “Here, Mahānāma, you should recollect the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is … the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’ When a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on the Tathāgata. A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma. When he is joyful, rapture arises. For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil. One tranquil in body feels pleasure. For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes collected. Mahānāma, you should develop this recollection of the Buddha while walking, standing, sitting, and lying down. You should develop it while engaged in work and while living at home in a house full of children. \[334\]

(7) “Again, Mahānāma you should recollect the Dhamma … (8) … the Saṅgha … (9) … your own virtuous behavior … (10) … your own generosity … (11) … the deities thus…. When a noble disciple recollects the faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, and wisdom in himself and in those deities, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on the deities. A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma. When he is joyful, rapture arises. For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil. One tranquil in body feels pleasure. For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes collected. Mahānāma, you should develop this recollection of the deities while walking, standing, sitting, and lying down. You should develop it while engaged in work and while living at home in a house full of children.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an11.12-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA933]] | A v 332 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA933]], [[AN6.8]], [[DN33]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN6.10]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.12]]
> ◄  [[an11.11-bodhi]] 📜  [[an11.13-bodhi]] ►
