---
sutta_code: "AN11.3"
sutta_title:
  - "Upanisa "
  - "Proximate Cause"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.3]]
> ◄  [[an11.2-bodhi]] 📜  [[an11.4-bodhi]] ►

# AN11.3 Proximate Cause (1)

> **Division:** I. DEPENDENCE

“Bhikkhus, (1) for an immoral person, for one deficient in virtuous behavior, (2) non-regret lacks its proximate cause. When there is no non-regret, for one deficient in non-regret, (3) joy lacks its proximate cause. When there is no joy, for one deficient in joy, (4) rapture lacks its proximate cause. When there is no rapture, for one deficient in rapture, (5) tranquility lacks its proximate cause. When there is no tranquility, for one deficient in tranquility, \[314\] (6) pleasure lacks its proximate cause. When there is no pleasure, for one deficient in pleasure, (7) right samādhi lacks its proximate cause. When there is no right samādhi, for one deficient in right samādhi, (8) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are lacks its proximate cause. When there is no knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one deficient in the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (9) disenchantment lacks its proximate cause. When there is no disenchantment, for one deficient in disenchantment, (10) dispassion lacks its proximate cause. When there is no dispassion, for one deficient in dispassion, (11) the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.

“Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage. Then its shoots do not grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood do not grow to fullness. So too, for an immoral person, one deficient in virtuous behavior, non-regret lacks its proximate cause. When there is no non-regret … the knowledge and vision of liberation lacks its proximate cause.

“Bhikkhus, (1) for a virtuous person, for one whose behavior is virtuous, (2) non-regret possesses its proximate cause. When there is non-regret, for one possessing non-regret, (3) joy possesses its proximate cause. When there is joy, for one possessing joy, (4) rapture possesses its proximate cause. When there is rapture, for one possessing rapture, (5) tranquility possesses its proximate cause. When there is tranquility, for one possessing tranquility, (6) pleasure possesses its proximate cause. When there is pleasure, for one possessing pleasure, (7) right samādhi possesses its proximate cause. When there is right samādhi, for one possessing right samādhi, (8) the knowledge and vision of things as they really are possesses its proximate cause. When there is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, for one possessing the knowledge and vision of things as they really are, (9) disenchantment possesses its proximate cause. When there is disenchantment, for one possessing disenchantment, (10) dispassion possesses its proximate cause. When there is dispassion, for one possessing dispassion, (11) the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.

“Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage. Then its shoots grow to fullness; also its bark, softwood, and heartwood grow to fullness. So too, for a virtuous person, one whose behavior is virtuous, non-regret possesses its proximate cause. When there is non-regret … the knowledge and vision of liberation possesses its proximate cause.” \[315\]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an11.3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA44]], [[MA45]], [[MA46]], [[MA47]], [[MA48]], [[MA49]], [[MA50]], [[SA495]] | A v 313 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.3]], [[MA47]], [[MA44]], [[AN8.81]], [[MA45]], [[AN7.65]], [[AN6.50]], [[MA48]], [[AN11.4]], [[AN5.21]], [[MA49]], [[AN5.22]], [[MA50]], [[AN5.24]], [[AN5.168]], [[MA46]], [[SA495]], [[AN10.4]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN5.21]], [[MA54]], [[MA55]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN11]]  / 🌐 [[AN11.3]]
> ◄  [[an11.2-bodhi]] 📜  [[an11.4-bodhi]] ►
