---
sutta_code: "SN50.1"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn50.13-bodhi]] ►

# SN50.1-12 The River Ganges—Eastward, Etc.

“Bhikkhus, there are these five powers. What five? The power of faith, the power of energy, the power of mindfulness, the power of samādhi, the power of wisdom. These are the five powers.

“Bhikkhus, just as the river Ganges slants, slopes, and inclines towards the east, so too a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the five powers slants, slopes, and inclines towards Nibbāna.

“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu develop and cultivate the five powers so that he slants, slopes, and inclines towards Nibbāna? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the power of faith, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release. He develops the power of energy … the power of mindfulness … the power of samādhi … the power of wisdom, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.

“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu develops and cultivates the five powers so that he slants, slopes, and inclines towards Nibbāna.”

  
  

(The remaining suttas of this vagga are to be similarly elaborated parallel to 45:92-102.) \[250\]

> Six about slanting to the east  
>   
> And six about slanting to the ocean.  
>   
> These two sixes make up twelve:  
>   
> Thus the subchapter is recited.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn50.1-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn50.13-bodhi]] ►
