---
sutta_code: "SN50.86"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.86]]
> ◄  [[sn50.67-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn50.89-bodhi]] ►

# SN50.86 Higher Fetters

“Bhikkhus, there are these five higher fetters. What five? Lust for form, lust for the formless, conceit, restlessness, ignorance. These are the five higher fetters. The four bases for spiritual power are to be developed for direct knowledge of these five higher fetters, for the full understanding of them, for their utter destruction, for their abandoning.

“What four? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to desire and volitional formations of striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses samādhi due to energy … samādhi due to mind … samādhi due to investigation and volitional formations of striving.

“These four bases for spiritual power are to be developed for direct knowledge of these five higher fetters, for the full understanding of them, for their utter destruction, for their abandoning.” \[293\]

> Floods, bonds, kinds of clinging,  
>   
> Knots, and underlying tendencies,  
>   
> Cords of sensual pleasure, hindrances,  
>   
> Aggregates, fetters lower and higher.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn50.86-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN50.86]]
> ◄  [[sn50.67-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn50.89-bodhi]] ►
