---
sutta_code: "MA1"
sutta_title:
  - "牛犁破群那 "
  - "Moliya Phagguṇa"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[ma2-bdk]] ►

### 1. The Discourse on Wholesome Qualities

Thus have I heard: At one time, the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks: If a monk achieves seven qualities, then he will attain joy and happiness in [the path of] the noble ones and will progress rightly toward the ces- sation of the taints. What are the seven? They are: a monk knows the Dharma, knows the meaning, knows the proper time, knows restraint, knows himself, knows assemblies, and knows persons according to their superiority. How does a monk know the Dharma? A monk knows the dis- courses, stanzas, expositions, verses, causes, inspired utterances, heroic tales, [what has been] “thus said,” birth stories, answers to questions, marvels, and explanations of meaning. This is a monk who knows the Dharma. If a monk does not know the Dharma—that is to say, does not know the discourses, stanzas, expositions, verses, causes, inspired utter- ances, heroic tales, [what has been] “thus said,” birth stories, answers to questions, marvels, and explanations of meaning—then such a monk is one who does not know the Dharma. If, [however,] a monk knows the Dharma well—that is to say, knows the discourses, stanzas, expositions, verses, causes, inspired utterances, heroic tales, [what has been] “thus said,” birth stories, answers to questions, marvels, and explanations of meaning—then such a monk is one who knows the Dharma well. How does a monk know the meaning? A monk knows the meaning of various explanations: “The meaning is this, the meaning is that.”


This is a monk who knows the meaning. If a monk does not know the meaning—that is to say, does not know the meaning of various explanations: “The meaning is this, the meaning is that”—then such a monk is one who does not know the meaning. If, [however,] a monk knows the meaning well—that is to say, knows the meaning of various explanations: “The meaning is this, the meaning is that”—then such a monk is one who knows the mean ing well. How does a monk know the proper time? A monk knows: “This is the time to develop the characteristic of settling,” “This is the time to develop the characteristic of arousing,” “This is the time to develop the characteristic of equanimity.” This is a monk who knows the proper time. If a monk does not know the proper time—that is to say, he does not know: “This is the time to develop the characteristic of settling,” “This is the time to develop the characteristic of arousing,” “This is the time to develop the characteristic of equanimity”—then such a monk is one who does not know the proper time. If, [however,] a monk knows well the proper time—that is to say, he knows: “This is the time to develop the characteristic of settling,” “This is the time to develop the characteristic of arousing,” “This is the time to develop the characteristic of equanimity”—then such a monk knows well the proper time. How does a monk know restraint? A monk knows restraint who, having discarded sloth and torpor, practices right attentiveness when drinking, eating, going, standing, sitting, lying down, speaking, keeping silent, defecating, or urinating. This is a monk who knows restraint. If a monk does not know restraint—that is to say, he does not know [how] to discard sloth and torpor and practice right attentiveness when drinking, eating, going, standing, sitting, lying down, speaking, keeping silent, defecating, or urinating—then such a monk is one who does not know restraint. If, [however,] a monk knows restraint well—that is to say, he knows [how] to discard drowsiness and practice right attentiveness

when drinking, eating, going, standing, sitting, lying down, speaking, keeping silent, defecating, or urinating—then such a monk is one who knows restraint well. How does a monk know himself? A monk knows of himself: “I have such faith, such virtue, such learning, such generosity, such wis- dom, such eloquence, such [knowledge of] the canonical texts, and such attainments.” This is a monk who knows himself. If a monk does not know himself—that is to say, he does not know of himself: “I have such faith, such virtue, such learning, such gen- erosity, such wisdom, such eloquence, such [knowledge of] the canon- ical texts, and such attainments”—then such a monk is one who does not know himself. If, [however,] a monk knows himself well—that is to say, he knows of himself: “I have such faith, such virtue, such learning, such gen- erosity, such wisdom, such eloquence, such [knowledge of] the canon- ical texts, and such attainments”—then such a monk is one who knows himself well. How does a monk know assemblies? A monk knows: “This is an assembly of _khattiya_ s,”^42 “This is an assembly of brahmins,” “This is an assembly of householders,” “This is an assembly of renunciants”; “In that [type of] assembly I ought to walk like this, stand like this, sit like this, speak like this, keep silent like this.” This is a monk who knows assemblies. If a monk does not know assemblies—that is to say, he does not know: “This is an assembly of _khattiya_ s,” “This is an assembly of brah- mins,” “This is an assembly of householders,” “This is an assembly of renunciants”; “In that [type of] assembly I ought to walk like this, stand like this, sit like this, speak like this, keep silent like this”— then such a monk is one who does not know assemblies. If, [however,] a monk knows assemblies well—that is to say, he knows: “This is an assembly of _khattiya_ s,” “This is an assembly of brahmins,” “This is an assembly of householders,” “This is an assembly of renunciants”; “In that [type of] assembly I ought to walk like this, stand like this, sit like this, speak like this, keep silent like this”—then such a monk is one who knows assemblies well.

How does a monk know persons according to their superiority? A monk knows that there are two types of persons: those who have faith and those who do not have faith. Those who have faith are superior; those who do not have faith are inferior. Of persons who have faith there are again two types: those who frequently go to see monks and those who do not frequently go to see monks.^43 Those who frequently go to see monks are superior; those who do not frequently go to see monks are inferior. Of persons who frequently go to see monks there are again two types: those who pay their respects to monks and those who do not pay their respects to monks. Those who pay their respects to monks are superior; those who do not pay their respects to monks are inferior. Of persons who pay their respects to monks there are again two types: those who ask about the discourses and those who do not ask about the discourses. Those who ask about the discourses are superior; those who do not ask about the discourses are inferior. Of persons who ask about the discourses there are again two types: those who listen with samādhi to a discourse and those who do not listen with samādhi to a discourse. Those who listen with con centration to a discourse are superior; those who do not listen with samādhi to a discourse are inferior. Of persons who listen with samādhi to a discourse there are again two types: those who retain the Dharma they have heard and those who do not retain the Dharma they have heard. Those who retain the Dharma they have heard are superior; those who do not retain the Dharma they have heard are inferior. Of persons who retain the Dharma they have heard there are again two types: those who examine the meaning of the Dharma they have heard and those who do not examine the meaning of the Dharma they have heard. Those who examine the meaning of the Dharma they have heard are superior; those who do not examine the meaning of the Dharma they have heard are inferior. Of persons who examine the meaning of the Dharma they have heard there are again two types: those who know the Dharma, know its meaning, progress in the Dharma, follow the Dharma, conform to

the Dharma, and practice in accordance with the Dharma; and those who do not know the Dharma, do not know its meaning, do not progress in the Dharma, do not follow the Dharma, do not conform to the Dharma, and do not practice in accordance with the Dharma. Those who know the Dharma, know its meaning, progress in the Dharma, follow the Dharma, conform to the Dharma, and practice in accordance with the Dharma are superior. Those who do not know the Dharma, do not know its meaning, do not progress in the Dharma, do not follow the Dharma, do not conform to the Dharma, and do not practice in accordance with the Dharma are inferior. Of persons who know the Dharma, know its meaning, progress in the Dharma, follow the Dharma, conform to the Dharma, and practice in accordance with the Dharma, there are again two types: there are those who benefit themselves and benefit others, who benefit many people, who have compassion for the world, seek advantage and benefit for gods and human beings, and seek their peace and happiness; and there are those who do not benefit themselves and do not benefit others, who do not benefit many people, who do not have compassion for the world, do not seek advantage and benefit for gods and human beings, and do not seek their peace and happiness. Those who benefit them- selves and benefit others, who benefit many people, who have com- passion for the world, seek advantage and benefit for gods and human beings, and seek their peace and happiness—this [type of] person is supreme among the [types of] person [mentioned above], the greatest, the highest, the best, the superior one, the most excellent one, the most sublime. It is just as from a cow comes milk, from milk comes cream, from cream comes butter, from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee; and among these cream of ghee is supreme, the greatest, the highest, the best, the superior one, the most excellent one, the most sublime. In the same way, if persons benefit themselves and benefit others, benefit many people, have compassion for the world, seek advantage and benefit for gods and human beings, and seek their peace and hap- piness, then of the two [types of] person spoken of above, distinguished

above, and designated above, this one is supreme, the greatest, the high est, the best, the superior one, the most excellent, the most sublime. This is [how] a monk knows persons according to their superiority. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.^44


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA39.1]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[PE1]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN5.73]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[ma2-bdk]] ►
