---
sutta_code: "MA101"
sutta_title:
  - "周那 "
  - "To Cuṇḍa"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA101]]
> ◄  [[ma100-bdk]] 📜  [[ma102-bdk]] ►

### 101. The Discourse on the Higher State of Mind

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks:

If a monk wishes to attain a higher state of mind ( adhicitta ) then he should frequently attend to five signs. Through frequent attention to these five signs, unwholesome thoughts that arise will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, the mind will be constantly established in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. What are the five [signs]? If unwholesome thoughts arise [while] a monk is giving attention to some sign related to what is wholesome, then because this [preliminary] sign [has led to the arising of unwholesome thoughts], he [should] instead attend to a different sign related to what is wholesome so that evil and unwholesome thoughts will no longer arise. [If,] because the [preliminary] sign [has led to the arising of unwholesome thoughts], he instead attends to a different sign related to what is wholesome, then the already arisen unwholesome thoughts will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly estab lished in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. It is just as a carpenter or a carpenter’s apprentice might apply an inked string to a piece of wood [to mark a straight line],^260 and then trim the wood with a sharp adze to make it straight.^261 In the same way, because the [preliminary] sign [has led to the arising of unwholesome thoughts], the monk instead attends to a different sign related to what is wholesome so that evil and unwholesome thoughts will no longer arise. [If,] because the [preliminary] sign [has led to the arising of unwholesome thoughts], he instead attends to a different sign related to what is wholesome, then the already arisen unwholesome thoughts will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished his mind will be constantly estab lished in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. If a monk wishes to attain a higher state of mind, he should frequently attend to this [different] first sign. Through attention to this sign, arisen unwholesome thoughts will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tran quility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. Again, if unwholesome thoughts arise [while] a monk is giving attention to a sign related to what is wholesome, then he [should] contemplate these thoughts as evil and beset by danger [thus]: “These thoughts are unwhole some, these thoughts are evil, these thoughts are abhorred by the wise.

One who is filled with these thoughts will not attain penetration, will not attain the path to awakening, will not attain nirvana, because they will cause the arising of [further] evil and unwholesome thoughts.” [If] he contemplates them in this way as evil, then the already arisen unwholesome thoughts will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tran- quility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. It is just as a young and very handsome person might take a bath and wash himself,^262 dress in clean clothes, apply perfume to his body, and comb his beard and hair, in order to be spotlessly clean. If someone were to take a dead snake, a dead dog, or a human corpse that has been half eaten [by animals], of bluish color, swollen and putrefied, with impurities oozing out, and put [the dead animal or body] around [that young person’s] neck, then [that person] would abhor the filth, they would not enjoy or like it. In the same way, a monk [should] contemplate these [arisen] thoughts as evil and beset by danger [thus]: “These thoughts are unwhole- some, these thoughts are evil, these thoughts are abhorred by the wise. One who is filled with these thoughts will not attain penetration, will not attain the path to awakening, will not attain nirvana, because they will cause the arising of [further] evil and unwholesome thoughts.” [If] he contemplates them in this way as evil, then the unwholesome thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished his mind will be constantly established in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. If a monk wishes to attain a higher state of mind, then he should fre- quently attend to this second sign. Through attention to this sign, arisen unwholesome thoughts will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tran- quility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. Again, if unwholesome thoughts arise while a monk is giving attention to a sign related to what is wholesome, and if while he is contemplating these thoughts as evil and dangerous unwholesome thoughts again arise, then that monk should not attend to those thoughts, because they will cause the arising of [further] evil and unwholesome thoughts.

[If] he does not attend to these thoughts, then the unwholesome thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tran quility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. It is just as when there are visible forms in a well-lit place and a person with good eyesight who [has] no wish to see them closes his eyes or turns away and leaves. What do you think? [Those] visible forms being in a well lit place, will that person be able to receive the image of those forms? [The monks] answered, “He will not.” [The Buddha said:] In the same way, a monk should not attend to these thoughts, because they will cause the arising of [further] evil and unwholesome thoughts. [If] he does not attend to these thoughts, then the unwholesome thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tran quility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. If a monk wishes to attain a higher state of mind, then he should fre quently attend to this third sign. Through attention to this sign, arisen unwholesome thoughts will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tran quility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. Again, if unwholesome thoughts arise while the monk is giving attention to a sign related to what is wholesome; and if, while he is contemplating these thoughts as evil and dangerous, unwholesome thoughts again arise; and if, while he is not attending to those thoughts, further unwholesome thoughts arise; then, in regard to these thoughts, that monk should deploy his volition to reduce those thoughts gradually so that evil and unwhole some thoughts no longer arise. [If] in regard to these thoughts he deploys his volition to reduce the thoughts gradually, then unwholesome thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi.

It is just as someone who is walking quickly, hurrying along, might reflect, “Why am I hurrying? Wouldn’t I rather walk more slowly now?” and so he walks slowly. Then he reflects again, “Why am I walking slowly? Wouldn’t I rather stand still?” and so he stands still. Then he reflects again, “Why am I standing? Wouldn’t I rather sit down?” and so he sits down. Then he reflects again, “Why am I sitting? Wouldn’t I rather lie down?” and so he lies down. In this way that person gradually calms his bodily gross activities. It should be understood that the monk, too, is like that [when], in regard to these thoughts, he deploys his volition to reduce those thoughts gradually so that evil and unwholesome thoughts no longer arise. [If,] in regard to these thoughts, he deploys his volition to reduce the thoughts gradually, then the unwholesome thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. If a monk wishes to attain a higher state of mind, then he should fre- quently attend to this fourth sign. Through attention to this sign, unwhole- some thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. Again, if unwholesome thoughts arise while the monk is giving attention to a sign related to what is wholesome; and if, while he is contemplating these thoughts as evil and dangerous, unwholesome thoughts also arise; and if, while he is not attending to those thoughts, further unwholesome thoughts arise; and if when he deploys his volition to reduce those thoughts gradually, unwholesome thoughts again arise; then that monk should con- template thus: “If, owing to these thoughts, unwholesome thoughts arise in a monk, then that monk should, with teeth clenched and tongue pressed against his palate, use mind to control mind, taking hold of it and subduing it, so that evil and unwholesome thoughts no longer arise.” [If] he uses mind to control mind, taking hold of it and subduing it, then the unwholesome thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi.

It is just as two strong men might seize a weaker man, taking hold of him and subduing him. In the same way a monk, with teeth clenched and tongue pressed against his palate, uses mind to control mind, taking hold of it and subduing it so that evil and unwholesome thoughts no longer arise. [If] he uses mind to control mind, taking hold of it and subduing it, then the unwholesome thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. If a monk wishes to attain a higher state of mind, then he should fre quently attend to this fifth sign. Through attention to this sign, unwhole some thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extinguished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be constantly established in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. If a monk wishes to attain a higher state of mind, he should frequently attend to these five signs. Through frequent attention to these five signs, unwholesome thoughts that have already arisen will be swiftly extin guished. Evil thoughts having been extinguished, his mind will be con stantly established in inner tranquility; it will become unified and attain samādhi. If when a monk gives attention to a sign related to what is wholesome, evil thoughts no longer arise; [if] when he contemplates [evil] thoughts as evil and dangerous, evil thoughts also no longer arise; [if] when he does not attend to [evil] thoughts, evil thoughts also no longer arise; if when he deploys his volition to reduce [evil] thoughts gradually, evil thoughts also no longer arise; [and] if when he uses mind to control mind, taking hold of it and subduing it, evil thoughts also no longer arise—then he has attained self-mastery. He thinks what he wishes to think and does not think what he does not wish to think. If a monk thinks what he wishes to think and does not think what he does not wish to think, then he is reckoned as a monk who thinks according to his wish, who has mastery of the courses of thought.^263

Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma101-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN10]], [[MN19]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA101]]
> ◄  [[ma100-bdk]] 📜  [[ma102-bdk]] ►
