---
sutta_code: "MA102"
sutta_title:
  - "優婆離 "
  - "To Upāli"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA102]]
> ◄  [[ma101-bdk]] 📜  [[ma103-bdk]] ►

### 102. The Discourse on Thoughts

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks: Formerly, when I had not yet awakened to unsurpassable, right, and total awakening, I had this thought: “Let me divide my thoughts into two parts, with thoughts of sensual desire, thoughts of ill-will, and thoughts of cruelty as one part, and thoughts without sensual desire, thoughts without ill-will, and thoughts without cruelty as the other part.” Thereafter I divided all my thoughts into two parts, with thoughts of sensual desire, thoughts of ill-will, and thoughts of harming as one part, and thoughts without sensual desire, thoughts without ill-will, and thoughts without harming as the other part. Practicing like this, I went and stayed in a remote and secluded place, practicing diligently with a mind free of negligence. [If] a thought of sen- sual desire arose, I at once realized “A thought of sensual desire has arisen, which is harmful to myself, harmful to others, harmful to both, which will destroy wisdom, cause much trouble, and not [lead to] attaining nirvana.” On realizing that it was harmful to myself, harmful to others, harmful to both, would destroy wisdom, cause much trouble, and not [lead to] attaining nirvana, it rapidly ceased. Again, [if] a thought of ill-will,... [or] a thought of cruelty arose, I at once realized “A thought of ill-will,... [or] a thought of cruelty has arisen, which is harmful to myself, harmful to others, harmful to both, which will destroy wisdom, cause much trouble, and not [lead to] attaining nirvana.” [When I] realized that it was harmful to myself, harmful to others, harmful to both, would destroy wisdom, cause much trouble, and not [lead to] attaining nirvana, it rapidly ceased. [If] a thought of sensual desire arose in me, I did not accept it but aban- doned it, discarded it, vomited it out. [If] a thought of ill-will,... [or] a thought of cruelty arose, I did not accept it but abandoned it, discarded it, and vomited it out. Why was that? Because I saw that countless evil unwholesome states would certainly arise because of [such thoughts].

It is just as in the last month of spring when, because the fields have been sown, the area where cows can graze is limited, and a cowherd, having set the cows free in uncultivated marshland, wields a cane to prevent them from straying into others’ fields. Why is that? Because the cowherd knows that he would certainly be scolded, beaten, or imprisoned [if the cows] trespassed. For this reason, the cowherd wields a cane to prevent it. In the same way, [if] a thought of sensual desire arose in me, I did not accept it but abandoned it, discarded it, and vomited it out. [If] a thought of ill-will,... [or] a thought of cruelty arose, I did not accept it but aban doned it, discarded it, and vomited it out. Why was that? Because I saw that countless evil and unwholesome states would certainly arise because of [such thoughts]. Monks, in accordance with what one intends, in accordance with what one thinks, the mind takes delight in that. If a monk often thinks thoughts of sensual desire and abandons thoughts without sensual desire, then through often thinking thoughts of sensual desire his mind takes delight in them. If a monk often thinks thoughts of ill-will,... [or] thoughts of cruelty and abandons thoughts without ill-will,... [or] thoughts without cruelty, then through often thinking thoughts of ill-will,... [or] thoughts of cruelty his mind takes delight in them. Thus a monk who has not abandoned thoughts of sensual desire, not abandoned thoughts of ill-will, and not abandoned thoughts of cruelty will be unable to free himself from birth, old age, disease, death, worry and sorrow, weeping and tears; he will not be able to free himself from all this dukkha.^265 Practicing in this way, I went and stayed in a remote and secluded place, practicing diligently with a mind free of negligence. [If] a thought without sensual desire arose in me, I at once realized, “A thought without sensual desire has arisen, which is not harmful to myself, not harmful to others, not harmful to both, which will [lead to] developing wisdom without difficulty, and to attaining nirvana.” On realizing that it was not harmful to myself, not harmful to others, not harmful to both, and that it would [lead to] developing wisdom without difficulty and to attaining nirvana, I rapidly developed it and made much of it.

Again, [if] a thought without ill-will,... [or] a thought without cruelty arose in me, I at once realized, “A thought without ill-will,... [or] a thought without cruelty has arisen, which is not harmful to myself, not harmful to others, not harmful to both, which will [lead to] developing wisdom without difficulty and to attaining nirvana.” On realizing that it was not harmful to myself, not harmful to others, not harmful to both, that it would [lead to] developing wisdom without difficulty and to attaining nirvana, I rapidly developed it and made much of it. [If] a thought without sensual desire arose in me, I intentionally kept on thinking it. [If] a thought without ill-will,... [or] a thought without cruelty arose, I intentionally kept on thinking it. I further had this thought: “If I intentionally keep on thinking my body will lose strength and my mind will be troubled. Let me rather keep my mind in check within, continuously dwelling in inner tranquility, unified, having attained samādhi, so that my mind will not be troubled.” Thereafter I kept my mind in check within, continuously dwelling in inner tranquility, unified, having attained samādhi, and my mind was no longer troubled. [If] a thought without sensual desire arose in me, I further [allowed] thoughts to arise that were inclined toward the Dharma and in accordance with the Dharma. [If] a thought without ill-will,... [or] a thought without cruelty arose, I further [allowed] thoughts to arise that were inclined toward the Dharma and in accordance with the Dharma. Why was that? [Because] I did not see that countless evil and unwholesome states would arise because of [such thoughts]. It is just as in the last month of autumn, when the entire harvest has been collected, a cowherd boy sets the cows free in the uncultivated fields and is mindful of them, thinking, “My cows are there in the herd.” Why is that? Because the cowherd boy does not see that he would be scolded, beaten, or imprisoned for any trespassing. For this reason he is mindful of them thus, “My cows are there in the herd.” In the same way, [if] a thought without sensual desire arose in me, I further [allowed] thoughts to arise that were inclined to the Dharma and in accordance with the Dharma. [If] a thought without ill-will,... [or] a thought without cruelty arose, I further [allowed] thoughts to arise that

were inclined to the Dharma and in accordance with the Dharma. Why was that? [Because] I did not see that countless evil and unwholesome states would arise because of [such thoughts]. Monks, in accordance with what one intends, in accordance with what one thinks, the mind takes delight in that. If a monk often thinks thoughts without sensual desire and abandons thoughts of sensual desire, then because of often thinking thoughts without sensual desire his mind takes delight in them. If a monk often thinks thoughts without ill-will,... [or] thoughts without cruelty, and abandons thoughts of ill-will,... [or] thoughts of cruelty, then because of often thinking thoughts without ill-will,... [or] thoughts without cruelty his mind takes delight in them.^266 With the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, he dwells having attained the second absorption, which is without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation and with rapture and happiness born of samādhi. Secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling in equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, expe riencing happiness with the body, he dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mind fulness, a happy abode. With the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of rapture and displeasure, with neither pain nor pleasure, and with purity of mindfulness and equanimity, he dwells having attained the fourth absorption. With his mind collected and purified in this way, free of defilements, free of troubles, malleable, well-steadied, having gained imperturbability, he directs it to the realization of the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints.^267 He knows as it really is: “This is dukkha ”; he knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of dukkha ”; he knows [as it really is]: “This is the ces sation of dukkha ”; he knows as it really is: “This is the path [leading to] the cessation of dukkha. ” He knows as it really is: “These are the taints”; he knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of the taints”; he knows [as it really is]: “This is

the cessation of the taints”; he knows as it really is: “This is the path [lead- ing] to the cessation of the taints.” Knowing like this and seeing like this, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance. Being liberated, he knows that he is liberated, knowing as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of exis- tence.” This monk, being free from thoughts of sensual desire, free from thoughts of ill-will, and free from thoughts of cruelty, attains liberation from birth, old age, disease, death, worry and sorrow, weeping and tears. He is free from all _dukkha._ It is just as if a herd of deer is living in a secluded area where there is a large spring. A man comes along who does not seek the benefit and wel- fare of that herd of deer, does not seek their safety and happiness. He blocks the right path and opens up a false path, digs a pit [as a trap], and gets someone to keep watch over it. In this way the entire herd of deer will be [trapped and] killed. Suppose another man comes along, who does seek the benefit and wel- fare of that herd of deer and seeks their safety and happiness. He opens up the right path, blocks off the bad path, and drives the watchman away. In this way the entire herd of deer will remains safe and sound. Monks, you should know that I have spoken this simile wishing you to know its meaning. On hearing a simile a wise person understands its implications. This is the meaning of this saying: The large spring represents the five cords of sensual pleasure that are agreeable, yearned for, and delighted in. What are the five? They are visible forms perceived by the eye, sounds perceived by the ear, odors perceived by the nose, flavors perceived by the tongue, and tangibles perceived by the body. You should know that “the large spring” represents these five sensual pleasures. You should [also] know that the great herd of deer [represents] renun- ciants and brahmins. You should [also] know that the one man who comes along and does not seek their benefit and welfare, their safety and happi- ness, [represents] Māra, the Evil One. Blocking the right path and opening

up a bad path [represents] the three evil and unwholesome types of thought: thoughts of sensual desire, thoughts of ill-will, and thoughts of cruelty. You should know that the evil path [represents] these three evil and unwholesome thoughts. Again, there is another evil path, namely the eight fold wrong path: wrong view,... up to... wrong samādhi; these are the eight.^268 You should [also] know that the great pit [represents] igno rance. You should [also] know that the watchman [represents] the retinue of Māra, the Evil One.^269 You should [also] know that the other man who comes along, seeking the benefit and welfare [of that herd of deer], seeking their safety and hap piness, [represents] the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened. Opening up the right path and blocking the evil path [represents] the three wholesome thoughts: thoughts without sensual desire, thoughts without ill-will, and thoughts without cruelty. You should know that the path [rep resents] these three wholesome thoughts. Again, there is another path, namely the eightfold right path: right view,... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. Monks, I have opened up the right path for you and blocked off the evil path; I have filled in the pit and driven away the watchman. What a teacher should do for his disciples out of great compassion, mercy, sym pathy, and concern, seeking their benefit and welfare, seeking their safety and happiness, I have now already done. You, too, should do your part. Go and sit in meditation in a secluded place, on a mountain, in a forest, at the base of a tree, in an empty and quiet place. Do not be negligent, make diligent effort, lest you regret it later. This is my instruction, this is my teaching. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma102-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.259]], [[MN20]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA102]]
> ◄  [[ma101-bdk]] 📜  [[ma103-bdk]] ►
