---
sutta_code: "MA104"
sutta_title:
  - "癡慧地 "
  - "Stages of the Fool and the Wise"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA104]]
> ◄  [[ma103-bdk]] 📜  [[ma105-bdk]] ►

### 104. The Discourse in the Udumbara [Forest]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time there was a householder called True Mind,^277 who in the early morning had left Rājagaha with the intention of approaching the Buddha and paying homage to him. Then the householder True Mind thought, “For the time being, never mind about approaching the Buddha. The World-honored One and the monks may [still] be sitting in meditation. Let me rather go to the udumbara forest and approach the park of the heterodox practitioners.” Then the householder True Mind went to the udumbara forest and approached the park of the heterodox practitioners.

At that time in the park of the heterodox practitioners in the _udumbara_ forest there was one heterodox practitioner named Nigrodha,^278 who was respected as a teacher among the heterodox practitioners, held in reverence by people as one who had vanquished many [opponents] and was the leader of five hundred heterodox practitioners. He was with a disorderly assembly that was making a great uproar, engag- ing in various types of animal talk,^279 discussions [about such things as] talk about kings, talk about thieves, talk about battles, talk about food and drink, talk about clothes and blankets, talk about married women, talk about girls, talk about adulterous women, talk about worldly customs, talk about wrong ways of practice, talk about the ocean, and talk about the country. They were all seated together there talking these various types of animal talk. When the heterodox practitioner Nigrodha saw the householder True Mind coming in the distance, he admonished his followers, telling them all to be silent:

Venerable friends, be silent! Don’t talk! Enjoy being silent! Let each one control himself! Why is that? The householder True Mind, a disciple of the renunciant Gotama, is coming. Among the disciples of the renunciant Gotama who have a high reputation for virtue and are worthy of respect, and who live as householders at Rājagaha, he is the foremost. He does not speak [much] but enjoys silence and practices self-restraint. If he knows that this assembly is established in silence, he will probably approach us. Then, having silenced his assembly, the heterodox practitioner Nigrodha became silent himself. Then the householder True Mind approached the het- erodox practitioner Nigrodha, exchanged friendly greetings, stepped back, and sat to one side. He said:

Nigrodha, our World-honored One makes a practice of sitting in meditation beneath a tree in some secluded area or mountain forest, or while dwelling on some high crag, in an isolated [place] without noise, remote, without disturbance, and without people. This is the nature of the Buddha, the World-honored One. He makes a practice of sitting in meditation beneath a tree in some secluded area or

mountain forest, or while dwelling on some high crag, in an isolated [place] without noise, remote, without disturbance, and without people. He always enjoys sitting in meditation in remote areas, at peace and happy. Since the beginning the Buddha, the World-honored One, has never met together with a large group, day and night, as you are doing today with your retinue. At this the heterodox practitioner Nigrodha said: Stop, householder, stop! How would you know? The renunciant Gotama is devoid of wisdom and liberation. You have no adequate basis for saying whether [his conduct] is appropriate or not, whether it is reasonable or not. That renunciant Gotama keeps to the fringes [of populated areas], enjoying the fringes and dwelling on the fringes. Just as a blind ox grazes on the fringes and keeps to the fringes, enjoying the fringes and dwelling on the fringes, it is like this too with the renunciant Gotama. Householder, if that renunciant Gotama were to come to this assembly, I would destroy him with a single argument, just as one might [smash] an empty pot, and I would tell him the simile of the blind ox. Then the heterodox practitioner Nigrodha addressed his assembly: Venerable friends, suppose the renunciant Gotama were to come to this assembly—if he must come, then don’t show him respect by getting up from your seats and extending your hands, with palms joined, toward him; and don’t invite him to sit on a prepared seat. When he arrives, say something like, “Gotama, there are seats. Sit where you like!”^280 At that time the World-honored One was sitting in meditation, and with the purified divine ear that surpasses [the hearing ability of ordinary] people he overheard this conversation between the householder True Mind and the heterodox practitioner Nigrodha. Then, in the late afternoon, he rose from sitting in meditation and approached the park of the heterodox practitioners in the udumbara forest. When the heterodox practitioner Nigrodha saw the World-honored One com ing in the distance, he got up from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder and, extending his hands with palms joined toward the Buddha,

he graciously said, “Welcome, renunciant Gotama! It is a long time since you have been here. Please take this seat!” Then the World-honored One thought, “This foolish man disregards his own instructions.” Knowing this, the World-honored One sat down on that seat. The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha exchanged polite greetings with the World-honored One, stepped back, and sat to one side. The World-honored One said, “Nigrodha, what topic have you been discussing with the householder True Mind? On account of what matter are you seated here together?” The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha replied: Gotama, we had this thought: “What are the teachings with which the renunciant Gotama instructs his disciples, such that his disciples, having been instructed, attain well-being and spend the rest of their lives practicing the holy life in purity and teaching it to others?” Gotama, this is the topic that I have been discussing with the house- holder True Mind; this is the matter on account of which we are seated here together.^281 On hearing these words, the householder True Mind thought, “How strange that this heterodox practitioner Nigrodha should be speaking a falsehood! Why is that? He is right in front of the Buddha trying to deceive the World- honored One.” Knowing this, the World-honored One said: Nigrodha, my teachings are profound, remarkable, and special. They are difficult to realize, difficult to know, difficult to see, and difficult to attain— that is to say, the teachings with which I instruct my disciples, such that having been so instructed my disciples spend the rest of their lives prac- ticing the holy life in purity and teaching it to others. Nigrodha, if you have any questions about the practice of self-morti- fication taught by your own teachers, then ask me. I will certainly be able to answer to your satisfaction. At this the disorderly assembly of heterodox practitioners all exclaimed in unison:

The renunciant Gotama is remarkable and special, with great supernormal power, great virtue, great merit, and great dignity! Why is that? He is able to let go of his own doctrine and answer questions asked in terms of another’s doctrine. At this, the heterodox practitioner Nigrodha admonished his assembly, telling them to be quiet. He asked, “Gotama, how does self-mortification reach fulfilment, and how does it not reach fulfilment?” Then the World-honored One replied: Nigrodha, there are some renunciants or brahmins who go around naked, unclothed, or who use their hands as clothing [to cover their private parts], or use leaves as clothing, or use beads as clothing; who abstain from using a pot to get water, or abstain from using a ladle to get water; who do not eat food that has been stolen with a knife or cudgel, who do not eat food [obtained] by cheating, or [that has been obtained] themselves by approaching [a donor], or by sending a messenger [to the donor], or [on hearing a donor say,] “Come, venerable sir!” or “Very well, venerable sir!” or “Stay, venerable sir!”; or who do not eat food when there are two people eating together, or food from the house of a pregnant woman, or from a house with a domestic dog, or who do not eat food from a house where there are excrement-eating flies; or who do not eat fish, do not eat meat, do not drink wine, do not drink bad water, or who do not drink anything at all, training in the practice of not drinking; who eat [only] one mouthful and are content with one mouthful, or eat [only] two,... three,... four,... up to... seven mouthfuls and are content with seven mouthfuls; or eat [only] what is obtained at a single [house] and are content with what is obtained at a single [house], or [only] what is obtained at two,... three,... four,... up to... seven [houses] and are content with what is obtained at seven [houses]; or who eat [only] once a day and are content with eating once a day, or eat [only] once every two days,... or three,... or four,... or five,... or six,... or seven days,... or once a fortnight,... or once a month and are content with eating [only] once [a month]; who eat [only] greens, or eat [only] millet, or wild rice, or rice bran, or rice scum, or eat [only] coarse food; or who go to the forest and, [living] in dependence on the forest, eat [only] roots, or eat [only] fruits, or eat [only] fruits that have fallen by themselves; who wear patchwork

robes, or robes made from hair, or robes made from woven material, or robes made from hair and woven material, or who wear complete hides, or hides with holes, or [both] complete hides and hides with holes; or who keep their hair disheveled, or keep their hair in braids, or keep their hair disheveled and in braids; who shave off their hair, or shave off their beard, or shave off both hair and beard;^282 who tear out their hair, or tear out their beard, or tear out both hair and beard; who stand continuously, rejecting seats; or move about in a squatting position; or lie down on thorns, making a bed of thorns; or lie down on fruits, making a bed of fruits; who worship water and make oblations day and night; or who worship fire, keeping it burning constantly; or who worship the sun and moon as spirits of great might, extending their hands with palms joined [in homage] to [the sun and moon]. In this and that way, they experience immeasurable suffering, training in the practice of tormenting [themselves]. Nigrodha, what do you think: does self-mortification of this kind reach fulfilment, or does it not reach fulfilment? The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha replied, “Gotama, self-mortification of this kind reaches fulfilment; it does not fail to reach fulfilment.” The World-honored One said further, “Nigrodha, I will tell you how the ful- filment of this self-mortification becomes polluted with countless defilements.” The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha asked, “Gotama, what can you tell me about how the fulfilment of this self-mortification becomes polluted with countless defilements?” The World-honored One replied: Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism has evil desires and thoughts of desire. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism has evil desires and thoughts of desire, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism looks up at the sun to absorb the energy of the sun.^283

Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism looks up at the sun to absorb the energy of the sun, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism becomes conceited, [thinking] to himself, “I have attained the rigorous practice of asceticism,” and his mind is bound and attached to it. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism becomes conceited, [thinking] of himself, “I have attained the rigorous practice of asceticism,” and his mind is bound and attached to it, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism praises himself and looks down on others. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism praises himself and looks down on others, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he goes from house to house praising himself, [saying,] “I practice extreme asceticism; I prac tice what is very difficult.” Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he goes from house to house praising himself, [saying,] “I undertake extreme asceticism; I practice what is very difficult,” then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism when he sees a renun ciant or brahmin receiving respect, support, and offerings from others, he becomes envious and says, “Why do you respect, support, and make offerings to that renunciant or brahmin? You should respect, support, and make offer ings to me! Why is that? [Because] I undertake ascetic practices.”

Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism when he sees a renunciant or brahmin receiving respect, support, and offerings from others, he becomes envious and says, “Why do you respect, support, and make offerings to that renun- ciant or brahmin? You should respect, support, and make offerings to me! Why is that? [Because] I undertake ascetic practices”—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism when he sees a renun- ciant or brahmin receiving respect, support, and offerings from others, he scolds that renunciant or brahmin to his face, saying, “What [have you done to earn] this respect, support, and offerings? You have much desire, much yearning, and you are constantly eating, eating root sprouts, stem sprouts, fruit sprouts, joint sprouts, and seed sprouts, these five.^284 Just as a torrential rainstorm does much damage to the five kinds of grain crops, creating havoc for farm animals and people, in the same way a renunciant or brahmin [like you does harm by] frequently entering others’ houses.” Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism when he sees a renunciant or brahmin receiving respect, support, and offerings from others, he scolds that renun- ciant or brahmin to his face, saying, “What [have you done to earn] this respect, support, and offerings? You have much desire, much yearning, and you are constantly eating, eating root sprouts, stem sprouts, fruit sprouts, joint sprouts, and seed sprouts, these five. Just as a torrential rain- storm does much damage to the five kinds of grain crops, creating havoc for farm animals and people, in the same way a renunciant or brahmin [like you does harm by] frequently entering others’ houses”—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he becomes worried and apprehensive, fearful [so that he] practices in secret for fear of losing his reputation or becoming increasingly negligent. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he becomes worried and apprehen- sive, fearful [so that] he practices in secret for fear of losing his reputation

or becoming increasingly negligent—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism there arise in him views [related] to personality ( sakkāya ), extreme views, wrong views, views conducive to clinging, which makes it difficult for his mind to be without limitations, with the result that he does not realize what renunciants or brahmins are able to realize.^285 Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism there arise in him views [related] to personality, extreme views, wrong views, views conducive to clinging, which makes it difficult for his mind to be without limitations, with the result that he does not realize what renunciants or brahmins are able to realize—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he becomes angry, entangled, tongue-tied, stingy, jealous, flattering, deceitful, shameless, and brazen. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he becomes angry, entangled, tongue tied, stingy, jealous, flattering, deceitful, shameless, and brazen—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he speaks falsehood, divisive speech, harsh speech, frivolous speech, and practices evil conduct. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he speaks falsehood, divisive speech, harsh speech, frivolous speech, and practices evil conduct, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he is without faith, negligent, without right mindfulness and right comprehension, and is pos sessed of stupidity.

Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he is without faith, negligent, without right mindfulness and right comprehension, and is possessed of stupidity, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as a defilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Nigrodha, have I not told you how the fulfilment of this self-mortification becomes polluted with countless defilements? The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha replied, “Indeed, Gotama has told me how the fulfilment of this self-mortification becomes polluted with count- less defilements.” [The Buddha said,] “Nigrodha, I will also tell you how the fulfilment of this self-mortification does not become polluted with countless defilements.” The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha asked again, “Gotama, what can you tell me about how the fulfilment of this self-mortification does not become polluted by countless defilements?” The World-honored One said: Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, have evil desires and thoughts of desire. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, have evil desires and thoughts of desire, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, look up at the sun to absorb the energy of the sun. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, look up at the sun to absorb the energy of the sun, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, become conceited, [thinking,] “I have achieved the rigorous practice of asceticism,” and his mind is not bound and attached to it.

Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, become conceited, [thinking,] “I have achieved the rigorous practice of asceticism,” and his mind is not bound and attached to it, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, praise himself and look down on others. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, praise himself and look down on others, then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, go from house to house praising himself, [saying,] “I practice extreme asceticism. I practice what is very difficult.” Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, go from house to house praising himself, [saying,] “I practice extreme asceticism. I practice what is very difficult,” then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism when he sees a renunciant or brahmin receiving respect, support, and offerings from others, does not become envious, saying: “Why do you respect, support, and make offerings to that renunciant or brahmin? You should respect, support, and make offerings to me! Why is that? [Because] I undertake ascetic practices.” Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism when he sees a renunciant or brahmin receiving respect, support, and offerings from others does not become envi ous, saying: “Why do you respect, support, and make offerings to that renunciant or brahmin? You should respect, support, and make offerings to me! Why is that? [Because] I undertake ascetic practices”—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism.

Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism when he sees a renunciant or brahmin receiving respect, support, and offerings from others does not scold that renunciant or brahmin to his face, saying: “What [have you done to earn] this respect, support, and offerings? You have much desire, much yearning, and you are constantly eating, eating root sprouts, stem sprouts, fruit sprouts, joint sprouts, and seed sprouts, these five. Just as a torrential rainstorm does much damage to the five kinds of grain crops, creating havoc for farm animals and people, in the same way a renunciant or brahmin [like you does harm by] frequently entering others’ houses.” Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism when he sees a renunciant or brahmin receiving respect, support, and offerings from others does not scold that renunciant or brahmin to his face, saying: “What [have you done to earn] this respect, support, and offerings? You have much desire, much yearning, and you are constantly eating, eating root sprouts, stem sprouts, fruit sprouts, joint sprouts, and seed sprouts, these five. Just as a torrential rain- storm does much damage to the five kinds of grain crops, creating havoc for farm animals and people, in the same way a renunciant or brahmin [like you does harm by] frequently entering others’ houses”—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, become worried and apprehensive, so fearful that he practices in secret for fear of losing his reputation or becoming increasingly negligent. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism and does not, on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, become worried and appre- hensive, so fearful that he practices in secret for fear of losing his reputation or becoming increasingly negligent—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism, there do not arise in him views [related] to personality, extreme views, wrong views, or views conducive to clinging, and this makes it not difficult for his mind

to be without limitations, so that he realizes what renunciants or brahmins are able to realize. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism there do not arise in him views [related] to personality, extreme views, wrong views, or views conducive to clinging, and that this makes it not difficult for his mind to be without limitations, so that he realizes what renunciants or brahmins are able to realize—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practi tioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he does not become angry, entangled, tongue-tied, stingy, jealous, flattering, deceitful, shame less, or reckless. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he does not become angry, entangled, tongue-tied, stingy, jealous, flattering, deceitful, shameless, or reckless— then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he does not speak falsehood, divisive speech, harsh speech, frivolous speech, or practice evil conduct. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he does not speak falsehood, divisive speech, harsh speech, frivolous speech, or practice evil conduct—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism. Again, Nigrodha, suppose that someone rigorously practices asceticism, and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he is not without faith, is not negligent but has right mindfulness and right comprehension, and is not possessed of stupidity. Nigrodha, if someone rigorously practices asceticism and on account of this rigorous practice of asceticism he is not without faith and negligent but has right mindfulness and right comprehension, and is not possessed of stupidity—then this, Nigrodha, is reckoned as nondefilement of the practitioner of asceticism.

Nigrodha, have I not told you how the fulfilment of this self-mortifi- cation does not become polluted by countless defilements? The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha replied, “Indeed, Gotama has told me how the fulfilment of this self-mortification does not become polluted by countless defilements.” The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha asked, “Gotama, does this self-mor- tification reach the highest? Does it reach the true essence?” The World-honored One replied: Nigrodha, this self-mortification does not reach the highest; it does not reach the true essence. Nevertheless, there are two modes [of self-morti- fication] that reach the skin and reach the joints. The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha asked again, “Gotama, how does this self-mortification reach the outer skin?” The World-honored One replied: Nigrodha, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin undertakes four practices: not killing living beings, not instructing others to kill, and not approving of killing; not stealing, not instructing others to steal, and not approving of stealing; not taking another’s wife, not instructing others to take another’s wife, and not approving of others taking another’s wife; not speaking falsehoods, not instructing others to speak falsehoods, and not approving of speaking falsehoods. He undertakes these four practices, delights in them, and does not transgress them.^286 He dwells with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, pervading one direction, likewise the second, third, and fourth directions, and also the four intermediate directions, above and below, all around, everywhere. He dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with loving- kindness, without fetters or resentment, without ill-will or contention, [a mind] that is boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. In the same way, he dwells with a mind imbued with compassion,... with empathetic joy,... with equanimity, without fetters or resentment, without ill-will or contention, [with a mind] that is boundless, exalted, immeas- urable, and well cultivated. Nigrodha, what do you think? Does such self- mortification reach the outer skin?

Nigrodha replied, “Gotama, this kind of self-mortification does reach the outer skin. Gotama, how does this self-mortification reach the joints?”^287 The World-honored One replied: Nigrodha, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin undertakes four practices: not killing living beings, not instructing others to kill, and not approving of killing; not stealing, not instructing others to steal, and not approving of stealing; not taking another’s wife, not instructing others to take another’s wife, and not approving of taking another’s wife; not speaking falsehood, not instructing others to speak falsehood, and not approving of speaking falsehood. He undertakes these four practices, delights in them, and does not transgress them. He recalls countless former lives traversed by him in the past, together with his activities and appearances [in those lives]: one birth, two births, a hundred births, a thousand births, eons of [world] expansion, eons of [world] contraction, countless eons of [world] expansion and contraction, [thus]: [I was] that living being named So-and-so; I went through those past experiences; I was [once] born there, with this family name, this given name, I had this type of life and this type of food and drink, experiencing this type of pleasure and pain, my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this. Dying here I was reborn there, dying there I was reborn here. I was reborn here with this family name, this given name, I had this type of life and this type of food and drink, I experienced this type of pleasure and pain, my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this. Nigrodha, what do you think? Does this kind of self-mortification reach the joints? Nigrodha replied: Gotama, this type of self-mortification reaches the joints. Gotama, how does this self-mortification reach the highest, how does it reach the true essence? The World-honored One replied:

Nigrodha, suppose a renunciant or brahmin undertakes four practices: not killing living beings, not instructing others to kill, and not approving of killing; not stealing, not instructing others to steal, and not approving of stealing; not taking another’s wife, not instructing others to take another’s wife, and not approving of others taking another’s wife; not speaking falsehood, not instructing others to speak falsehood, and not approving of speaking falsehood. He undertakes these four practices, delights in them, and does not transgress them. With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses [the vision of ordi- nary] people, he sees beings as they die and as they are reborn, handsome or ugly, superior or inferior, as they come and go between good and bad realms of existence, in accordance with the [previous] deeds of these living beings. He sees as it really is that, if these living beings undertook evil bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, if they reviled noble ones, held wrong views, and undertook actions [based on] wrong views, then because of these causes and conditions at the breaking up of the body at death they certainly go to a bad realm of existence, and are reborn in hell. If, [however,] these living beings undertook good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, if they did not revile noble ones, held right views, and undertook actions [based on] right views, then because of these causes and conditions at the breaking up of the body after death they certainly ascend to a good realm of existence, and are reborn in heavenly realms. Nigrodha, what do you think: has this kind of self-mortification reached the highest? Has it reached the true essence?

Nigrodha replied:

Gotama, this kind of self-mortification has reached the highest; it has reached the true essence. Gotama, is it for realizing this self-mortification that the disciples of the renunciant Gotama practice the holy life in depend- ence on the renunciant [Gotama]?

The World-honored One replied:

Nigrodha, it is not for realizing this self-mortification that my disciples practice the holy life in dependence on me. Nigrodha, there is something

else that is supremely superior, supremely sublime, supremely excellent, for the realization of which my disciples practice the holy life in depend ence on me. At this the disorderly assembly of heterodox practitioners exclaimed loudly: It is like this, it is like this! The realization of that is why the disciples of the renunciant Gotama practice the holy life in dependence on the renun ciant Gotama!^288 Then the heterodox practitioner Nigrodha admonished his assembly. Hav ing quietened them, he asked: Gotama, what is that something else that is supremely superior, supremely sublime, supremely excellent, for the realization of which the disciples of the renunciant Gotama practice the holy life in dependence on the renunciant Gotama? Then the World-honored One said: Nigrodha, the Tathāgata arises in the world, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, leader on the path of Dharma, teacher of deva s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one. [A disciple of the Tathāgata] abandons the five hindrances that defile the mind and weaken wisdom. Secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, he dwells having attained... up to... the fourth absorption.^289 With his mind collected and purified in this way, without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, having gained imperturbability, he directs his mind toward knowledge and realization of the destruction of the taints. He knows as it really is: “This is dukkha. ” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of dukkha. ” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of dukkha. ” He knows as it really is: “This is the path to the ces sation of dukkha. ”

He knows as it really is: “These are the taints.” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of the taints.” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of the taints.” He knows as it really is: “This is the path to the cessation of the taints.” Knowing like this, seeing like this, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire,... from the taint of existence, his mind is liberated from the taint of ignorance. It being liberated, he knows that it is liberated, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been estab- lished, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another expe- riencing of existence.” Nigrodha, this is reckoned as something else that is supremely superior, supremely sublime, supremely excellent, for the realization of which my disciples practice the holy life in dependence on me. Then the householder True Mind said: Nigrodha, the World-honored One is [sitting] right here. You can now destroy him with a single argument, as you might [smash] an empty pot, and tell him the simile of the blind ox that grazes on the fringes. On hearing this, the World-honored One asked the heterodox practitioner Nigrodha, “Did you really speak like this?” The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha replied, “I really [spoke] like this, Gotama.” The World-honored One asked again: Nigrodha, haven’t you heard this from senior and former practitioners? “Tathāgatas of the past, free from attachment, fully awakened, made a practice of sitting in meditation beneath a tree in a secluded area or moun- tain forest, or while dwelling on a high crag, in an isolated [place] without noise, remote, without disturbance, and without people. “All buddhas, world-honored ones, have made a practice of sitting in meditation beneath a tree in a secluded area or a mountain forest, or while dwelling on a high crag, in an isolated [place] without noise, remote, with- out disturbance, and without people. Following the practice of sitting in meditation, they have always enjoyed being in remote areas, at peace and happy. From the beginning they have never gathered day and night in a group,” as you are doing today with your followers.

The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha replied: Gotama, I have heard this from senior and former practitioners: “Tathāgatas of the past, free from attachment, fully awakened, made a practice of sitting in meditation beneath a tree in a secluded area or a mountain forest, or while dwelling on a high crag, in an isolated [place] without noise, remote, without disturbance, and without people. “All buddhas, world-honored ones, have made a practice of sitting in meditation beneath a tree in a secluded area or a mountain forest, or while dwelling on a high crag, in an isolated [place] without noise, remote, with out disturbance, and without people. Following the practice of sitting in meditation, they have always enjoyed being in remote areas, at peace and happy. From the beginning they have never gathered day and night in a group,” as I am doing today with my followers. [The Buddha said:] Nigrodha, did you not have this reflection: “Just as those world-honored ones [of the past] made a practice of sitting in meditation beneath a tree in a secluded area or a mountain forest, or while dwelling on a high crag, in an isolated [place] without noise, remote, without disturbance, and without people; and they always enjoyed sitting in meditation in remote areas, at peace and happy—[so too in the present] the renunciant Gotama is practicing the path to full awakening?” The heterodox practitioner Nigrodha replied: Gotama, had I known this, what grounds would I have had for making a declaration like this, “I will destroy him with a single argument, as I might [smash] an empty pot, and I will tell him the simile of the blind ox that grazes on the fringes”?^290 The World-honored One said: Now, Nigrodha, I have the Dharma, which is wholesome and connected with the wholesome, whose every sentence relating to liberation can be realized. It is for this reason that the Tathāgata calls himself ‘fearless.’ All monks who come to me as disciples, without flattery, without deceit,

honest, and without deception, will, after having been taught by me and having followed my instruction, certainly attain final knowledge.^291 Nigrodha, if you are thinking, ‘the renunciant Gotama teaches the Dharma out of a desire to become the teacher,’ don’t think like that! The [role of] teacher remains yours even while I am teaching you the Dharma. Nigrodha, if you are thinking, ‘the renunciant Gotama teaches the Dharma out of a desire to get disciples,’ don’t think like that! These dis- ciples remain yours even while I am teaching you the Dharma. Nigrodha, if you are thinking, ‘the renunciant Gotama teaches the Dharma out of a desire to get offerings,’ don’t think like that! The offerings remain yours even while I am teaching you the Dharma. Nigrodha, if you are thinking, ‘the renunciant Gotama teaches the Dharma out of a desire for praise and acclaim,’ don’t think like that! The praise and acclaim remain yours even while I am teaching you the Dharma. Nigrodha, you may be thinking: ‘If I had the Dharma, which is whole- some and connected with the wholesome, whose every sentence relating to liberation can be realized, then that renunciant Gotama would capture me and destroy me.’ Don’t think like that! The Dharma remains yours even while I am teaching you the Dharma.^292 At this [all in] the large assembly remained silent. Why was that? Because they were under the control of King Māra. Then the World-honored One said to the householder True Mind: See how this large assembly remains silent. Why is that? Because they are under the control of King Māra. Because of him, among this assembly of heterodox practitioners there is not a single heterodox practitioner who thinks: “Let me try cultivating the holy life under the renunciant Gotama.” Knowing this, the World-honored One taught the Dharma to the house- holder True Mind, exhorting, inspiring, and fully delighting him. Having exhorted, inspired, and fully delighted him by teaching him the Dharma using countless skillful means, [the Buddha] rose from his seat. Then, taking the householder True Mind by the arm, he flew up into the air using supernormal power and departed.^293 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the house- holder True Mind was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma104-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[DA8]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DA14]], [[MA134]], [[SNP3.6]], [[SN22.4]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA104]]
> ◄  [[ma103-bdk]] 📜  [[ma105-bdk]] ►
