---
sutta_code: "MA111"
sutta_title:
  - "五下分結 "
  - "Five Lower Fetters"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA111]]
> ◄  [[ma110-bdk]] 📜  [[ma112-bdk]] ►

### 111. The Discourse on Fulfilling the Holy Life

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying among the Kurus, in the Kuru city of Kammāsadhamma. At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks: I will teach you the Dharma, which is sublime in the beginning, sublime in the middle, and also sublime in the end, with its meaning and phrasing, endowed with purity, revealing the holy life, namely, fulfilling the holy life and being capable of ending the taints. Listen closely and pay proper attention! Then the monks listened to receive the teaching. The World-honored One said: You should know the taints, know the cause for the arising of the taints, know the result of the taints, know the diversity of the taints, know the cessation of the taints, and know the path to the cessation of the taints.^314 You should know feelings, know the cause for the arising of feelings, know the result of feelings, know the diversity of feelings, know the ces sation of feelings, and know the path to the cessation of feelings. You should know perception, know the cause for the arising of per ception, know the result of perception, know the diversity of perception, know the cessation of perception, and know the path to the cessation of perception. You should know sensual pleasures, know the cause for the arising of sensual pleasures, know the result of sensual pleasures, know the diversity

of sensual pleasures, know the cessation of sensual pleasures, and know the path to the cessation of sensual pleasures. You should know karma, know the cause for the arising of karma, know the result of karma, know the diversity of karma, know the cessation of karma, and know the path to the cessation of karma. You should know _dukkha,_ know the cause for the arising of _dukkha,_ know the result of _dukkha,_ know the diversity of _dukkha,_ know the ces- sation of _dukkha,_ and know the path to the cessation of _dukkha._ What is “knowing the taints”? There are three taints: the taint of sensual desire, the taint of existence, and the taint of ignorance. This is called “knowing the taints.” What is “knowing the cause for the arising of the taints”? It is ignorance. Because of ignorance, the taints come into being. This is called “knowing the cause for the arising of the taints.” What is “knowing the result of the taints”? It is bondage due to igno- rance. Because of being stained by the taints, one receives the result: either attaining a good realm of existence, or attaining a bad realm of existence. This is called “knowing the result of the taints.” What is “knowing the diversity of the taints”? There are taints [leading to] rebirth in hell, there are taints [leading to] rebirth among animals, there are taints [leading to] rebirth among hungry ghosts, there are taints [leading to] rebirth in a heaven, there are taints [leading to] rebirth as a human being. This is called “knowing the diversity of the taints.” What is “knowing the cessation of the taints”? When ignorance is erad- icated, the taints are eradicated. This is called “knowing the cessation of the taints.” What is “knowing the path to the cessation of the taints”? It is the noble eightfold path: right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. This is called “knowing the path to the cessation of the taints.” If a monk knows the taints in this way, knows the cause for the arising of the taints, knows the result of the taints, knows the diversity of the taints, knows the cessation of the taints, and knows the path to the cessation of the taints, then he is reckoned as fulfilling the holy life and being capable of ending all the taints.

What is “knowing feelings”? There are three kinds of feeling: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, and neutral feeling. This is called “knowing feelings.” What is “knowing the cause for the arising of feelings”? It is contact. Because of contact there is feeling. This is called “knowing the cause for the arising of feelings.” What is “knowing the result of feelings”? It is craving. Craving is the result of feelings. This is called “knowing the result of feelings.”^315 What is “knowing the diversity of feelings”? When a monk feels a pleasant feeling, he knows he is feeling a pleasant feeling. When a monk feels a painful feeling, he knows he is feeling a painful feeling. When a monk feels a neutral feeling, he knows he is feeling a neutral feeling. When he feels a bodily pleasant... a bodily painful... a bodily neutral feeling... a mental pleasant... a mental painful... a mental neutral feeling... a worldly pleasant... a worldly painful... a worldly neutral feeling... an unworldly pleasant... an unworldly painful... an unworldly neutral feeling... a pleasant... a painful... a neutral feeling related to sensuality... a pleasant... a painful... a neutral feeling unrelated to sensuality, then he knows he is feeling a neutral feeling unrelated to sen suality. This is called “knowing the diversity of feelings.”^316 What is “knowing the cessation of feelings”? The cessation of contact is the cessation of feelings. This is called “knowing the cessation of feelings.” What is “knowing the path to the cessation of feelings”? It is the noble eightfold path: right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. This is called “knowing the path to the cessation of feelings.” If a monk knows feelings in this way, knows the cause for the arising of feelings, knows the result of feelings, knows the diversity of feelings, knows the cessation of feelings, and knows the path to the cessation of feelings, then he is reckoned as fulfilling the holy life and being capable of ending all feelings. What is “knowing perception”? There are four kinds of perception. A monk knows narrow perception, knows great perception, knows perception of boundlessness, and knows perception of the sphere of nothingness. This is called “knowing perception.”^317

What is “knowing the cause for the arising of perception”? It is contact. Because of contact there is perception. This is called “knowing the cause for the arising of perception.” What is “knowing the result of perception”? It is verbalization. Fol- lowing on perception there is verbalization. This is called “knowing the result of perception.” What is “knowing the diversity of perception”? There is perception that perceives visible forms, there is perception that perceives sounds, there is perception that perceives odors, there is perception that perceives tastes, and there is perception that perceives tangibles. This is called “knowing the diversity of perception.” What is “knowing the cessation of perception”? The cessation of contact is the cessation of perception. This is called “knowing the cessation of perception.” What is “knowing the path to the cessation of perception”? It is the noble eightfold path: right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. This is called “knowing the path to the cessation of perception.” If a monk knows perception in this way, knows the cause for the arising of perception, knows the result of perception, knows the diversity of per- ception, knows the cessation of perception, and knows the path to the ces- sation of perception, then he is reckoned as fulfilling the holy life and being capable of ending all perception. What is “knowing sensual pleasures”? There are the five strands of sensual pleasure, which are desirable, delightful, attractive, connected with sensual desire, and extremely pleasurable. What are the five? Visible forms known by the eye, sounds known by the ear, odors known by the nose, flavors known by the tongue, and tangibles known by the body. This is called “knowing sensual pleasures.” What is “knowing the cause for the arising of sensual pleasures”? It is contact. Because of contact there are sensual pleasures. This is called “knowing the cause for the arising of sensual pleasures.” What is “knowing the result of sensual pleasures”? Following sensual pleasures is the seed for craving for pleasure, clinging to it, and dwelling in it. Because of this, one receives as a result existence in a meritorious

condition, a demeritorious condition, or an imperturbable condition. This is called “knowing the result of sensual pleasures.” What is “knowing the diversity of sensual pleasures”? There is sensual pleasure with regard to forms, sensual pleasure with regard to sounds, sensual pleasure with regard to odors, sensual pleasure with regard to tastes, and sensual pleasure with regard to tangibles. This is called “know ing the diversity in sensual pleasures.” What is “knowing the cessation of sensual pleasures”? The cessation of contact is the cessation of sensual pleasures. This is called “knowing the cessation of sensual pleasures.” What is “knowing the path to the cessation of sensual pleasures”? It is the noble eightfold path: right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. This is called “knowing the path to the cessation of sensual pleasures.” If a monk knows sensual pleasures in this way, knows the cause for the arising of sensual pleasures, knows the result of sensual pleasures, knows the diversity of sensual pleasures, knows the cessation of sensual pleasures, and knows the path to the cessation of sensual pleasures, then he is reckoned as fulfilling the holy life and being capable of ending all sensual pleasures. What is “knowing karma”? There are two types of karma: intention and intentional action. This is called “knowing karma.” What is “knowing the cause for the arising of karma”? It is contact. Because of contact there is karma. This is called “knowing the cause for the arising of karma.” What is “knowing the result of karma”? There is karma that is black and has black results; there is karma that is white and has white results; there is karma that is black and white and has black and white results; and there is karma that is neither black nor white, that has no result, karma [that leads to] the destruction of karma. This is called “knowing the result of karma.”^318 What is “knowing the diversity of karma”? There is karma [leading to] rebirth in hell, there is karma [leading to] rebirth among animals, there is karma [leading to] rebirth among hungry ghosts, there is karma [leading

to] rebirth in a heaven, there is karma [leading to] rebirth as a human being. This is called “knowing the diversity of karma.” What is “knowing the cessation of karma”? The cessation of contact is the cessation of karma. This is called “knowing the cessation of karma.” What is “knowing the path to the cessation of karma”? It is the noble eightfold path: right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. This is called “knowing the path to the cessation of karma.” If a monk knows karma in this way, knows the cause for the arising of karma, knows the result of karma, knows the diversity of karma, knows the cessation of karma, and knows the path to the cessation of karma, then he is reckoned as fulfilling the holy life and being capable of ending all karma. What is “knowing _dukkha_ ”? Birth is _dukkha,_ old age is _dukkha,_ disease is _dukkha,_ death is _dukkha,_ association with what is disliked is _dukkha,_ dissociation from what is liked is _dukkha,_ not getting what one wants is _dukkha_ ; in brief, the five aggregates of clinging are _dukkha._^319 This is called “knowing _dukkha._ ” What is “knowing the cause for the arising of _dukkha_ ”? It is craving. Because of craving, _dukkha_ arises. This is called “knowing the cause for the arising of _dukkha._ ” What is “knowing the result of _dukkha_ ”? There is minor _dukkha_ that passes away only slowly; there is minor _dukkha_ that passes away quickly; there is intense _dukkha_ that passes away only slowly; and there is intense _dukkha_ that passes away quickly. [Knowing] _dukkha_ and the cessation of _dukkha_ : this is called “knowing the result of _dukkha._ ” What is “knowing the diversity of _dukkha_ ”? An unlearned ignorant worldling, who has not found a good spiritual friend and has not encountered the noble Dharma, experiences the arising of extreme pain in his body, pain so severe that one would wish to end one’s life to escape it. He seeks [a remedy] from outsiders [thinking]: “There may be some renunciant or brahmin who knows a spell consisting of one verse, or two verses, three verses, four verses, a spell of many verses, or [even] a spell consisting of a hundred verses, that will cure my _dukkha_ !” Because he seeks like this, _dukkha_ arises [in him]. [As] the causes of it come together,^320 _dukkha_ arises and _dukkha_ ceases. This is called “knowing the diversity of _dukkha._ ”^321

What is “knowing the cessation of dukkha ”? The cessation of craving is the cessation of dukkha. This is called “knowing the cessation of dukkha. ” What is “knowing the path to the cessation of dukkha ”? It is the noble eightfold path: right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. This is called “knowing the path to the cessation of dukkha. ” If a monk knows dukkha in this way, knows the cause for the arising of dukkha, knows the result of dukkha, knows the diversity of dukkha, knows the cessation of dukkha, and knows the path to the cessation of dukkha, then he is reckoned as having fulfilled the holy life and being capable of ending all dukkha. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma111-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA111]]
> ◄  [[ma110-bdk]] 📜  [[ma112-bdk]] ►
