---
sutta_code: "MA122"
sutta_title:
  - "愛生 "
  - "What Arises from Affection"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA122]]
> ◄  [[ma121-bdk]] 📜  [[ma123-bdk]] ►

### 122. The Discourse at Campā

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Campā, beside the pond of Gaggarā.

At that time, on the fifteenth of the month, at the time of the recital of the code of rules, the World-honored One sat down on a seat arranged before an assembly of monks. Having sat down, the World-honored One immediately entered a meditative samādhi. By means of the knowledge of the minds of others he observed the minds of the assembly. Having observed the minds of the assembly, he sat silently until the end of the first watch of the night.^379 Then a certain monk rose from his seat, arranged his robe to bare one shoul- der, extended his hands with palms together toward the Buddha, and said:

World-honored One, the first watch of the night has ended. The Buddha and the assembly of monks have been sitting together for a long time. May the World-honored One recite the code of rules!^380 At that time the World-honored One remained silent and did not answer. Then the World-honored One remained sitting silently through the middle watch of the night. That monk again rose from his seat, arranged his robe to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with palms together toward the Buddha, and said:

World-honored One, the first watch of the night has passed and the middle watch of the night is about to end. The Buddha and the assembly of monks have been sitting together for a long time. May the World-honored One recite the code of rules! The World-honored One again remained silent. Then the World-honored One remained sitting silently through the last watch of the night. A third time that monk rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with palms together towards the Buddha, and said:

World-honored One, the first watch of the night has passed, the middle watch of the night has also ended, and the last watch of the night is coming to an end. It is nearly dawn. Dawn will be breaking before long. The Buddha and the assembly of monks have been sitting together for a very long time. May the World-honored One recite the code of rules! Then the World-honored One told that monk, “Among this assembly there is one monk who is impure.”

At that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was also seated among the assem- bly. Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna thought, “About which monk does the World-honored One say that one monk in this assembly is impure? Let me enter the appropriate meditative samādhi such that, through that appropriate meditative samādhi I acquire the knowledge of the minds of others and can observe the minds of the assembly.” Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna entered the appropriate meditative con- centration such that through that appropriate meditative samādhi he acquired the knowledge of the minds of others and could observe the minds of the assembly. Venerable Mahāmoggallāna then knew in regard to which monk the World-honored One had said that one monk in the assembly was impure. Thereupon Venerable Mahāmoggallāna rose from his meditative concen- tration, went up to that monk, pulled him by the arm, and led him out. He opened the door and sent him outside, [saying:]

Ignorant man, go far away! Don’t stay here! You can no longer participate in gatherings of the sangha. As of now you have left it. You are not a monk.^381 He closed the door, locked it, and returned to the Buddha. Having paid respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet, he stepped back, sat to one side, and said:

I have expelled the monk about whom the World-honored One said that one monk in the assembly was impure. World-honored One, the first watch of the night has passed, the middle watch of the night has also ended, and the last watch of the night is coming to an end. It is nearly dawn. Dawn will be breaking before long. The Buddha and the assembly of monks have been sitting together for a very long time. May the World-honored One recite the code of rules! The World-honored One said: Mahāmoggallāna, that foolish person committed a great offense by troubling the World-honored One and the assembly of monks. Mahāmoggallāna, if the Tathāgata had recited the code of rules in an impure assembly [of monks], the head of that [impure] man would have split into seven pieces.^382

For this reason, Mahāmoggallāna, from now on you are to recite the code of rules [yourselves]. The Tathāgata will no longer recite the code of rules.^383 Why is this? It is like this, Mahāmoggallāna. It may be that an ignorant man practices right comprehension when coming and going; that he is properly observant and discerning when bending, stretching, looking up, and looking down; that he has a composed manner; that he skillfully wears his outer robe and his other robes and [carries his] bowl; that he practices right comprehension when walking, standing, sitting, and reclining, as well as when sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent—all like a genuine practitioner of the holy life. When he approaches those who are genuinely practicing the holy life, they might not recognize [his real inner condition]. Mahāmoggallāna, when his companions in the holy life come to rec- ognize [his real inner condition], they think, “He is a pollutant among renunciants, a disgrace among renunciants, an abomination among renun- ciants, a thorn among renunciants.” Having recognized him [as such], they should collectively reject him. Why is that? So as not to let [him] corrupt those who are [genuinely] practicing the holy life. Mahāmoggallāna, it is just as if a householder had a good rice field or wheat field, but there were to emerge in it a kind of weed called “impure wheat,” whose roots, stem, nodes, leaves, and flowers all resembled those of [genuine] wheat. Later, once [the impure wheat] had matured, the house- holder would see it and think, “This is a pollutant and a disgrace to [gen- uine] wheat, an abomination and a thorn to [genuine] wheat.” Having rec- ognized it, he would pull it up and throw it out [of the field]. Why is that? So as not to let it corrupt the genuine, good wheat. In the same way, Mahāmoggallāna, it may be that an ignorant man practices right comprehension when coming and going; that he is properly observant and discerning when bending, stretching, looking up, and looking down; that he has a composed manner; that he skillfully wears his outer robe and his other robes and [carries his] bowl; that he practices right comprehension when walking, standing, sitting, and reclining, as well as when sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent—all like a genuine practitioner of the holy life. When he approaches those who are genuinely practicing the holy life, they might not recognize [his real inner condition].

Mahāmoggallāna, when his companions in the holy life come to rec ognize [his real inner condition], they think, ‘He is a pollutant among renunciants, a disgrace among renunciants, an abomination among renun ciants, a thorn among renunciants.” Having recognized him [as such], they should collectively reject him. Why is that? So as not to let [him] corrupt those who are [genuinely] practicing the holy life. Mahāmoggallāna, it is just as when a householder is winnowing the [rice] grain in autumn, the grains in the pile that are fully mature will, when tossed up, fall down again and remain there; but the grains that are not fully mature will be carried away by the wind along with the rice chaff. Seeing this, the householder takes a broom and sweeps away [the immature grains and chaff] so that [the floor] is clean. Why is that? So as not to let the remaining good clean rice be polluted. In the same way, Mahāmoggallāna, it may be that an ignorant man practices right comprehension when coming and going; that he is properly observant and discerning when bending, stretching, looking up, and looking down; that he has a composed manner; that he skillfully wears his outer robe and his other robes and [carries his] bowl; that he practices right comprehension when walking, standing, sitting, and reclining, as well as when sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent, all like a genuine practitioner of the holy life. When he approaches those who are genuinely practicing the holy life, they might not recognize [his real inner condition]. Mahāmoggallāna, when his companions in the holy life come to rec ognize [his real inner condition], they think, “He is a pollutant among renunciants, a disgrace among renunciants, an abomination among renun ciants, a thorn among renunciants.’ Having recognized him [as such], they should collectively reject him. Why is that? So as not to let [him] corrupt those who are [genuinely] practicing the holy life. Mahāmoggallāna, it is just as a householder, intending to make a water chute to channel spring water, takes an ax and goes into the forest. He taps on the trees. If they are firm and solid they make little sound; if they are hollow, they make a louder sound. Having recognized [the tree he wants], the householder then chops it down and trims away its knots to make it into a water chute.

In the same way, Mahāmoggallāna, it may be that an ignorant man practices right comprehension when coming and going; that he is properly observant and discerning when bending, stretching, looking up and looking down; that he has a composed manner; that he skillfully wears his outer robe and his other robes and [carries his] bowl; that he practices right comprehension when walking, standing, sitting, and reclining, as well as when sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent, all like a genuine practitioner of the holy life. When he approaches those who are genuinely practicing the holy life, they might not recognize [his real inner condition]. Mahāmoggallāna, when his companions in the holy life come to rec- ognize [his real inner condition], they think, “He is a pollutant among renunciants, a disgrace among renunciants, an abomination among renun- ciants, a thorn among renunciants.” Having recognized him [as such], they should collectively reject him. Why is that? So as not to let [him] corrupt those who are [genuinely] practicing the holy life.

Then the World-honored One uttered these verses:

When assembled together you should recognize [The one who harbors] evil desires, hatred, jealousy, anger, The fetter of obstinate silence, malevolence, stinginess, Jealousy, fawning, and deceit.

[The one] in the sangha who deceitfully claims to be calm, Taking cover by claiming to be a renunciant, [Yet] secretly does evil deeds, [Holds] evil views, unguarded, [The one who] cheats and lies— You should recognize him as such.

Do not associate with him! Reject him! Do not stay together with him! Speaking much, he cheats and boasts, Not calm, he claims to be calm.

Knowing the right time, [those who are] equipped with pure conduct Reject him and keep distant from him.

The pure should associate with the pure, Always together in harmony. Being in harmony, they will be at peace, And thus attain the end of dukkha. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma122-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA122]]
> ◄  [[ma121-bdk]] 📜  [[ma123-bdk]] ►
