---
sutta_code: "MA133"
sutta_title:
  - "優婆離 "
  - "With Upāli"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA133]]
> ◄  [[ma132-bdk]] 📜  [[ma134-bdk]] ►

### 133. The Discourse on Upāli

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Nāḷandā in Pāvārika’s Mango Grove. At that time the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin, who was wandering about in the afternoon, approached the Buddha. After exchanging greetings, he stepped

back and sat to one side. Then the World-honored One asked him, “Tapassin, how many [types of ] actions does the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta designate for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions?” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered: Gotama, my honored master, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, does not designate to us “[types] of actions” for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions; instead he designates to us “restraints” for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions.^22 The World-honored One asked again, “Tapassin, how many restraints does the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta designate for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions?” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered: Gotama, my honored master, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, designates to us three restraints for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions. What are the three? They are bodily restraint, verbal restraint, and mental restraint. The World-honored One asked further, “Tapassin, do bodily restraint, verbal restraint, and mental restraint differ from one another?” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered, “Gotama, for us bodily restraint, verbal restraint, and mental restraint do differ from one another.” The World-honored One asked further: Tapassin, of these three restraints like this, which restraint does the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta designate as the most serious one for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions: bodily restraint, verbal restraint, or mental restraint? The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered: Gotama, of these three restraints like this, my honored master, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, designates bodily restraint as the most serious for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions. Verbal restraint is less serious; mental restraint is the least serious, in contrast to bodily restraint, which is extremely serious. The World-honored One asked further, “Tapassin, did you say that bodily restraint is the most serious one?”

The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered, “Gotama, bodily restraint is the most serious.” The World-honored One asked a second and a third time, “Tapassin, did you say that bodily restraint is the most serious one?” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin also answered a second and a third time, “Gotama, bodily restraint is the most serious one.” Then the World-honored One, having thus three times ascertained the standpoint of the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin, remained silent. The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin asked, “How many restraints does the renun- ciant Gotama designate for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions?” Then the World-honored One answered: Tapassin, I do not designate “restraints” for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions; instead I designate “actions” for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions. The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin asked, “How many actions does Gotama designate for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions?” The World-honored One answered again: Tapassin, I designate three actions for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions. What are the three? They are bodily action, verbal action, and mental action. The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin asked, “Gotama, do bodily action, verbal action, and mental action differ from one another?” The World-honored One answered again, “Tapassin, to me, bodily action, verbal action, and mental action do differ from one another.” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin asked: Gotama, of these three actions like this, which action do you designate as the most serious one for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions: bodily action, verbal action, or mental action? The World-honored One answered again: Tapassin, of these three actions like this, I designate mental action as the

most serious one for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions. Bodily action and verbal action are not like that. The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin asked, “Gotama, you designate mental action as the most serious one?” The World-honored One answered again, “Tapassin, I designate mental action as the most serious one.” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin asked a second and a third time, “Gotama, you designate mental action as the most serious one?” The World-honored One answered a second and a third time, “Tapassin, I designate mental action as the most serious one.” Then the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin, having three times ascertained the standpoint of the World-honored One, rose from his seat, circumambulated the World-honored One three times, and left. He approached the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta. The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, on seeing the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin coming in the distance, asked him, “Tapassin, where are you coming from?” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered, “Honored One, I am coming from Nāḷandā, Pāvārika’s Mango Grove, where the renunciant Gotama is stay ing.” The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta asked, “Tapassin, did you have any discussion with the renunciant Gotama?” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered, “We did have a discussion together.” The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said, “Tapassin, if you had a discussion with the renunciant Gotama, tell me about it in full. Perhaps I can come to understand what he proclaims.” Then the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin told him in full what he had discussed with the World-honored One. After hearing it, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta praised him, saying: It is well, Tapassin, in that you have performed a disciple’s duty toward the master. What you did was to debate wisely, intelligently, and decisively. You have achieved great mastery in argument with calmness and fear lessness. You have acquired the banner of ambrosia. You have personally attained the realm of ambrosia and are abiding in it.

Why is that? Because you have, before the renunciant Gotama, desig- nated bodily restraint as the most serious one for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions, verbal restraint as less serious, and mental restraint as the least serious—in contrast to bodily restraint, which is extremely serious. At this time the householder Upāli was together with five hundred house- holders who had gathered in the assembly. He extended his hands with joined palms toward the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta. Then the householder Upāli said to the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin, “Honored one, you ascertained the standpoint of the renunciant Gotama three times—is that so?” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered, “Householder, I ascertained the standpoint of the renunciant Gotama three times—that is so.” The householder Upāli said to the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin: I too am able to ascertain the standpoint of the renunciant Gotama up to three times, and having done so in this matter, drag him around at will. Just as a strong man might seize a long-haired sheep and drag it around at will, in the same way I will be able to ascertain the standpoint of the renunciant Gotama up to three times and then drag him around at will. Just as a strong man might take hold of a fur cloak with his hands and shake it to remove any dust, in the same way I will be able to ascertain the standpoint of the renunciant Gotama up to three times and then drag him around at will.^23 Just as a master brewer or his apprentice might put a brewing filter deep into the water and drag it around at will, however he wishes, in the same way I will be able to ascertain the standpoint of the renunciant Gotama up to three times and then drag him around at will. Just as a great royal elephant, fully sixty years old, a proud _mahānāga,_ with fully grown tusks, feet, and body, with abundant muscular strength might be led away by a strong man who washes its hips, its back, its flanks, its belly, its tusks, and its head with water, and makes it play in the water,^24 in the same way I will be able to ascertain the standpoint of the renunciant Gotama up to three times and then wash him around at will. I will approach the renunciant Gotama and debate with him; and having defeated him, I will come back here.

The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta told the householder Upāli, “I too could defeat the renunciant Gotama. You too could do it, and the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin too could do it.” Then the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin said to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta: I do not want to have the householder Upāli approach the renunciant Gotama. Why is that? The renunciant Gotama knows a magic spell that enables him to convert people so that they become his disciples as monks, nuns, laymen, or laywomen. I fear that the householder Upāli might be converted by the renunciant Gotama and become his disciple. The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said: Tapassin, it is impossible that the householder Upāli might be converted by the renunciant Gotama and become his disciple. It is, however, certainly possible that the renunciant Gotama might be converted by the householder Upāli and become his disciple. A second and a third time the householder Upāli said to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, “I will now approach the renunciant Gotama and debate with him and, having defeated him, I will come back here.” A second and a third time the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta answered, “You can quickly go there. I too could defeat the renunciant Gotama. You too could do it and the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin too could do it.” A second and a third time the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin said: I do not want to have the householder Upāli approach the renunciant Gotama. Why is that? The renunciant Gotama knows a magic spell that enables him to convert people so that they become his disciples as monks, nuns, laymen, or laywomen. I fear that the householder Upāli might be converted by the renunciant Gotama and become his disciple. The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said: Tapassin, it is impossible that the householder Upāli might be converted by the renunciant Gotama to become his disciple. It is, however, certainly possible that the renunciant Gotama might be converted by the householder Upāli to become his disciple. Householder Upāli, go according to your wish!

Then the householder Upāli paid homage with his head at the feet of the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, circumambulated him three times, and left. He approached the Buddha, exchanged greetings, stepped back, and sat to one side. He asked, “Gotama, did the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin come here today?” The World-honored One answered, “He did, householder.” The householder Upāli asked, “Gotama, did you have any discussion with the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin?” The World-honored One answered, “Yes, there was some discussion.” The householder Upāli said, “Gotama, if you tell me in full what you dis- cussed with the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin, perhaps I can understand it after having heard it.” Then the World-honored One told him in full what he had discussed with the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin. Then the householder Upāli, having heard this, expressed praise: It is well that Tapassin has performed a disciple’s duty toward the master. What he did was to debate wisely, intelligently, and decisively. He has achieved great mastery in argument with calmness and fearlessness. He has acquired the banner of ambrosia. He has attained the realm of ambrosia and is abiding in it. Why is that? Because he has, before the renunciant Gotama, designated bodily restraint as the most serious one for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions, verbal restraint as less serious, and mental restraint as the least serious—in contrast to bodily restraint, which is extremely serious. Then the World-honored One said, “Householder, I am willing to discuss this matter with you if you will take a stance on truth and answer according to truth.” The householder Upāli replied, “Gotama, I will take a stance on truth and answer according to truth. Renunciant Gotama, you may feel free to discuss this matter with me.” The World-honored One asked: Householder, what do you think? Suppose that a Nigaṇṭha comes by who is fond of giving and delights in giving, who does not [engage in] merry- making and delights in not [engaging in] merrymaking, who is of the highest purity and highest performance in his vows, [yet] in going and coming he

kills many big and small insects.^25 Householder, what result does the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta designate for this kind of killing of living beings? The householder Upāli answered, “Gotama, if it is intentional, it is a great offense; if it is unintentional, it is not a great offense.” The World-honored One asked, “Householder, what do you mean by inten tion?” The householder Upāli answered, “Gotama, I mean mental action.” The World-honored One said: Householder, you should answer only after consideration. Of what you have said, the earlier disagrees with the latter, and the latter disagrees with the earlier; they do not correspond. Householder, you yourself have pro claimed in this assembly, “Gotama, I will take a stance on truth and answer according to truth. Renunciant Gotama, you may feel free to discuss this matter with me.” Householder, what do you think? Suppose that a Nigaṇṭha comes by who drinks [only] boiled water and refuses unboiled water. When there is no boiled water [available], he has a desire to drink unboiled water. Not obtaining [even] unboiled water he dies.^26 Householder, according to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, where would this Nigaṇṭha be reborn? The householder Upāli answered, “Gotama, there is a heaven called Mind with Attachment. If the Nigaṇṭha died with attachment in his mind, he would certainly be reborn there.” The World-honored One said: Householder, you should answer only after consideration. Of what you have said, the earlier disagrees with the latter, and the latter disagrees with the earlier; they do not correspond. You yourself have proclaimed in this assem bly, “Gotama, I will take a stance on truth and answer according to truth. Renunciant Gotama, you may feel free to discuss this matter with me.” Householder, what do you think? Suppose that a man comes by carrying a sharp knife and he says, “In a single day I will chop, cut, split up, and slice up all the living beings here in Nāḷandā to make one heap of flesh, to make one pile of flesh.” Householder, what do you think? Would that man

be able, in a single day, to chop, cut, split up, and slice up all the living beings here in Nāḷandā to make one heap of flesh, to make one pile of flesh?

The householder Upāli answered:

No, [he could not]. Why is that? This Nāḷandā is very large, flourishing, and opulent, with many inhabitants. For this reason, that man would cer- tainly not be able, in a single day, to chop, cut, split up, and slice up all the living beings here in Nāḷandā to make one heap of flesh, to make one pile of flesh. Gotama, that man would be making a great deal of trouble for himself in vain.

[The World-honored One said:]

Householder, what do you think? Suppose that a renunciant or a brahmin comes by who is endowed with great bases of supernormal power, great power, great merit, great might, who has attained mastery of the mind, and he says, “I shall burn this entire Nāḷandā to ashes by sending out one thought of hatred.” Householder, what do you think? Would that renunciant or brahmin be able to burn this entire Nāḷandā to ashes?

The householder Upāli answered:

Gotama, not just one Nāḷandā; not just two, three, or four [Nāḷandās]. Gotama, since that renunciant or brahmin is endowed with great bases of supernormal power, great power, great merit, great might, and has attained mastery of the mind, if he sent out one thought of hatred, he could burn entire countries and entire populations to ashes. What, then, of one Nāḷandā?

The World-honored One said:

Householder, you should answer only after due consideration. Of what you have said, the earlier disagrees with the latter, and the latter disagrees with the earlier; they do not correspond. You yourself have proclaimed in this assembly, “Gotama, I will take a stance on truth and answer accord- ing to truth. Renunciant Gotama, you may feel free to discuss this matter with me.”

The World-honored One asked:

Householder, have you heard how certain forests became forests, namely the Great Marshy Forest, the Unicorn Forest, the Deer Forest, the Tranquil Forest, and the Empty Field Forest?^27 The householder Upāli answered, “Gotama, I have heard about that.” [The World-honored One said:] Householder, what do you think? Who made those forests become forests, namely the Great Marshy Forest, the Unicorn Forest, the Deer Forest, the Tranquil Forest, and the Empty Field Forest? The householder Upāli remained silent.^28 The World-honored One said: Householder, answer quickly! Householder, answer quickly! Now is not the time for silence. Householder, you yourself proclaimed in this assembly, “Gotama, I will take a stance on truth and answer according to truth. Renunciant Gotama, you may feel free to discuss this matter with me.” Then the householder Upāli, after remaining silent for a while, replied: Gotama, I was not just keeping silence; I was thinking about this matter. Gotama, the foolish Nigaṇṭhas do not clearly understand; they are not able to realize; they do not recognize what is a fertile field; they do not examine themselves. They have cheated me for a long time. I have been misled by them into proclaiming before the renunciant Gotama that bodily restraint is the most serious one for not performing evil actions, not doing evil actions, and that verbal restraint and mental restraint cannot match it. As I understand the meaning, from what the renunciant Gotama has said, [it is not the case that bodily restraint is more serious, since] a seer sending out a thought of hatred is what made those forests become forests, namely the Great Marshy Forest, the Unicorn Forest, the Deer Forest, the Tranquil Forest, and the Empty Field Forest.^29 World-honored One, I have come to know. Well-gone One, I have understood. I now personally take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One receive me as a lay disciple, from this day forth, until life ends. I personally take refuge for my whole life.

The World-honored One said, “Householder, you had better keep quiet and not announce it. For a highly placed person like yourself it is good to keep quiet.”^30 The householder Upāli said: World-honored One, because of this, I am even more delighted and pleased with the World-honored One. Why is that? Because the World-honored One speaks like this: “Householder, you had better keep quiet and not announce it. For a highly placed person like yourself it is good to keep quiet.” World-honored One, if I were to become a disciple of another renunciant or brahmin, they would take flags, banners, and parasols and parade all around Nāḷandā announcing, “The householder Upāli has become a disciple of mine! The householder Upāli has become a disciple of mine!” Yet the World-honored One speaks like this: “Householder, you had better keep quiet and not announce it. For a highly placed person like yourself it is good to keep quiet.” The householder Upāli said: World-honored One, from this day forth I will not allow Nigaṇṭhas to enter my house. I will allow only the four assemblies of disciples of the World-honored One to enter, that is, monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. The World-honored One said: Householder, the Nigaṇṭhas have been respected by all in your household for a long time. If they come, you should support them according to your ability. The householder Upāli said: World-honored One, because of this, I am even more delighted and pleased with the World-honored One. Why is that? Because the World-honored One speaks like this: “Householder, those Nigaṇṭhas have been respected by all in your household for a long time. If they come, you should support them according to your ability.” World-honored One, earlier I heard a report that the World-honored One speaks like this: “You should give alms to me; do not give alms to

others! You should give alms to my disciples; do not give alms to others’ disciples! If you give alms to me, you will receive great merit; if you give alms to others, you will not receive great merit. If you give alms to my disciples, you will receive great merit; if you give alms to others’ disciples, you will not receive great merit.” The World-honored One said:^31 Householder, I do not speak like this: “You should give alms to me; do not give alms to others! You should give alms to my disciples; do not give alms to others’ disciples! If you give alms to me, you will receive great merit; if you give alms to others, you will not receive great merit. If you give alms to my disciples, you will receive great merit; if you give alms to others’ disciples, you will not receive great merit.” Householder, I speak like this: “You should give alms to all people according as your mind delights. However, if you give alms to those who do not practice diligently, you will not receive great merit; if you give alms to those who do practice diligently, you will receive great merit.” The householder Upāli said: World-honored One, I wish to be independent. I myself will know whether I should give alms to Nigaṇṭhas or not give alms to Nigaṇṭhas. World honored One, I now again personally take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One receive me as a lay disciple from this day forth until life ends. I personally take refuge for my whole life. Then the World-honored One taught the Dharma to the householder Upāli, to exhort and inspire him, fully delighting him. Having taught him the Dharma with countless skillful means, having exhorted and inspired him, fully delight ing him, he did as all buddhas do when they first give instruction in the proper and true Dharma to gladden their listeners. That is, he spoke about generosity, he spoke about moral discipline, and he spoke about the conditions for rebirth in heaven; he warned of the dangers in sensual desire and the defilements in birth and death; and he praised the sublime nature of dispassion and the purity of the requisites of awakening. The World-honored One taught him such teachings.

[Then] the Buddha knew that his mind had become gladdened, contented, malleable, receptive, uplifted, collected, free from doubt, and free from the hindrances, [and that he had] the ability and power to receive the true Dharma, that is, the essential teaching of all buddhas. Then the World-honored One taught him the [truths of] _dukkha,_ of its arising, of its cessation, and of the path [leading to its cessation]. Then the householder Upāli, as he sat there, immediately saw the four noble truths of _dukkha,_ its arising, its cessation, and the path [leading to its cessation]. Just as white silk is easily dyed with colors, in the same way the householder Upāli, as he sat there, immediately saw the four noble truths of _dukkha,_ its arising, its cessation, and the path [leading to its cessation]. Thereupon the householder Upāli saw the Dharma, attained the Dharma, realized the pure white Dharma. He discarded doubt and overcame perplexity; [henceforth] he would venerate no other [teacher], would no longer follow others. He was without uncertainty, having attained the fruit of realization and attained unshakability in the Dharma of the World-honored One. Then he rose from his seat, paid homage to the Buddha [and said]: World-honored One, now for the third time I personally take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-hon- ored One receive me as a lay disciple, from this day forth until life ends. I personally take refuge for my whole life. Then the householder Upāli, having heard what the Buddha said, received it well and kept it well [in mind]. He paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and returned [home]. He gave orders to his gatekeeper:

You should know that I am now a disciple of the World-honored One. From now on, when Nigaṇṭhas come, do not allow them to enter the gate. Allow only the four assemblies of disciples of the World-honored One to enter; that is, monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. If a Nigaṇṭha comes, you should tell him, “Venerable Sir, the house holder Upāli has been converted by the Buddha and is now his disciple. He does not allow Nigaṇṭhas to enter the gate; he allows only the four assemblies of disciples of the World-honored One to enter: monks, nuns,

laymen, and laywomen. If you need food, then stand here and food will be brought out to you.” Then the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin heard that the householder Upāli had been converted by the renunciant Gotama and become a disciple and that he was therefore not allowing Nigaṇṭhas to enter the gate, but allowing only the four assemblies of disciples of the renunciant Gotama to enter, that is monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. Having heard this, the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha ta passin approached the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta and said, “Honored One, this is as I said earlier.” The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta asked, “Tapassin, what did you say earlier?”^32 The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered: Honored One, earlier I said, “I do not want to have the householder Upāli approach the renunciant Gotama. Why is that? The renunciant Gotama knows a magic spell that enables him to convert people so that they become his disciples as monks, nuns, laymen, or laywomen. I fear that the house holder Upāli might be converted by the renunciant Gotama and become his disciple.” Honored One, the householder Upāli has now been converted by the renunciant Gotama. Having been converted and become a disciple, he does not allow Nigaṇṭhas to enter his gate, allowing only the four assem blies of disciples of the renunciant Gotama to enter: monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said: Tapassin, it is impossible that the householder Upāli might be converted by the renunciant Gotama and become his disciple; it is, however, certainly possible that the renunciant Gotama might be converted by the householder Upāli and become his disciple.^33 The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin spoke again, “If the Honored One does not believe what I have said, then let the Honored One go himself or dispatch a messenger.”^34 Then, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said: Tapassin, you yourself go and see whether the householder Upāli has been

converted by the renunciant Gotama and become his disciple, or whether the renunciant Gotama has been converted by the householder Upāli and become his disciple. Having received this instruction from the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin approached the house of the householder Upāli. The gatekeeper saw the Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin coming in the distance and said:

Venerable one, the householder Upāli has been converted by the Buddha and is now his disciple. He therefore does not allow Nigaṇṭhas to enter the gate, allowing only the four assemblies of disciples of the World-hon- ored One to enter, that is, monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. If you wish to receive food, then stand here and food will be brought out to you. The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin said, “Gatekeeper, I do not need food.” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin, knowing this, raised his head and left. He approached the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta and said, “Honored One, it is as I said earlier.” The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta asked, “Tapassin, what did you say earlier?” The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin answered: Honored One, earlier I said, “I do not wish to have the householder Upāli approach the renunciant Gotama. Why is that? The renunciant Gotama knows a magic spell that enables him to convert people so that they become his disciples as monks, nuns, laymen, or laywomen. I fear that the house- holder Upāli might be converted by the renunciant Gotama and become his disciple.” Honored One, the householder Upāli has now been converted by the renunciant Gotama. Having been converted and become his disciple, he does not allow Nigaṇṭhas to enter the gate. He allows only the four assem- blies of disciples of the renunciant Gotama to enter: monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said: Tapassin, it is impossible that the householder Upāli might be converted by the renunciant Gotama and become his disciple; it is, however, certainly

possible that the renunciant Gotama might be converted by the householder Upāli and become his disciple. The Nigaṇṭha Dīghatapassin said, “If the Honored One does not believe what I have said, then let the Honored One go there himself.” Then the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, together with a large company of five hun- dred Nigaṇṭhas, approached the house of the householder Upāli. The gate- keeper saw the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, together with a large company of five hundred Nigaṇṭhas, coming in the distance and said:

Venerable one, the householder Upāli has been converted by the Buddha and become his disciple. He therefore does not allow Nigaṇṭhas to enter the gate, allowing only the four assemblies of disciples of the World-hon- ored One to enter, that is, monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. If you wish to receive food, then stand here and food will be brought out to you. The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said, “Gatekeeper, I do not need food, but I wish to see the householder Upāli.” The gatekeeper said, “May the Honored One stand here. I will go in now and tell the honorable householder, honorable Upāli.” Then the gatekeeper went in and said: Householder, you should know that the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, together with a large company of five hundred Nigaṇṭhas, is standing outside the gate. He says, “I wish to see the householder Upāli.” The householder Upāli told the gatekeeper, “Go to the central gate and prepare seats. That done, come back and tell me.” Having received this instruction, the gatekeeper went to the central gate. Having prepared seats, he returned and said, “Householder, you should know that the seats have been prepared. May the householder himself know the [right] time.” The householder Upāli went to the central gate followed by the gatekeeper. There was a seat, very high and broad, very clean and nicely prepared, which the householder Upāli formerly used to offer to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta to sit on.^35 The householder Upāli took it himself and sat down cross-legged. He told the gatekeeper, “Go out to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta and say this: ‘Honored

One, the householder Upāli says that if the Honored One would like to enter, then let him do as he wishes.’” The gatekeeper, having received this instruction, went out to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta and said, “Honored One, the householder Upāli says that if the Honored One would like to enter, then let him do as he wishes.” Then, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, together with the large company of five hundred Nigaṇṭhas, entered by the central gate. The householder Upāli saw from afar the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta entering, together with a large company of five hundred Nigaṇṭhas, and said, “Honored One, there are seats. Sit where you like!” The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said: Householder, is it appropriate for you to mount to a high seat, sit down cross-legged, and speak to others as if you were no less than one who has gone forth to train in the path?^36 The householder Upāli said: Honored One, these are my possessions. If I want to give, I give; if I do not want to give, I do not give. Because the seats are mine, I speak like this: “There are seats. Sit where you like!” The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta sat on a prepared seat and said: Householder, what is the reason for this? You wanted to defeat the renunciant Gotama, but instead you yourself have been defeated. You are just like a person who goes into the forest in search of “eyes” (myrobalan fruit), but returns having lost his [own] eyes.^37 In the same way, householder, you wanted to defeat the renunciant Gotama, but instead you yourself have been defeated by the renunciant Gotama. You are just like a person who goes into a pool because he is thirsty, but instead returns still thirsty. In the same way, householder, you wanted to defeat the renunciant Gotama, but instead you yourself return defeated. Householder, what is the reason for this?^38 The householder Upāli said: Honored One, allow me to speak a simile. A wise man, on hearing a simile, understands its implications. Honored One, there was once a brahmin with

a young wife. The wife was pregnant, and she told her husband, “Sir, I am now pregnant. Go to the market and buy a nice plaything for the child!” Then the brahmin said to his wife, “Let us just hope that you have a safe delivery. Why worry about having no [plaything right now]? If you give birth to a boy, I will buy a boy’s plaything for you. If you give birth to a girl, I will buy a girl’s plaything for you.” The wife told her husband three times, “Sir, I am now pregnant. Quickly, go to the market and buy a nice plaything for the child!” The brahmin also told his wife a second and a third time, “Let us just hope that you have a safe delivery. Why worry about having no [plaything right now]? If you give birth to a boy, I will buy a boy’s plaything for him. If you give birth to a girl, I will buy a girl’s plaything for her.” The brahmin, being very fond of his wife, asked, “What kind of play thing do you want me to buy for the child?” His wife answered, “Sir, go and buy a monkey as a nice plaything for the child.” On hearing that, the brahmin went to the market to buy a monkey as a plaything, brought it back, and told his wife, “I have come back after buying a monkey as a plaything for the child.” His wife, on seeing [the monkey], disliked the color, [finding it] unat tractive. Then she told her husband, “Sir, take this monkey plaything to a dyer and have him dye it yellow, so as to be very attractive, and have him pound it so that it becomes shiny.” On hearing that, the brahmin immediately took the monkey plaything to a dyer and said, “Dye this monkey plaything a nice yellow color for me to make it very attractive and pound it so that it becomes shiny!” Then the dyer said to the brahmin, “I can dye the monkey plaything yellow and make it very attractive, but I cannot make it become shiny by pounding it.” Then, the dyer recited these verses:^39 A monkey can endure being dyed, But it cannot endure being pounded. If pounded, it will die. It simply cannot take a hammering. This monkey is [just] a foul stinking bag Full of impurities.

Honored One, you should know that what the Nigaṇṭhas proclaim is also like this. It cannot endure questioning by others. It cannot take reflec- tion and examination. It takes the dye of foolishness; it does not take the dye of wisdom. Honored One, listen again. It is just like a clean piece of Benares cloth. The owner took it to that dyer and said, “Dye this cloth for me. Make it a very nice color, make it very attractive. Also pound it thoroughly to make it become shiny!” Then the dyer told the owner of the cloth, “This cloth can be dyed, made to have a very nice color, made very attractive, and it can also be pounded thoroughly and made to become shiny.” Then, the dyer recited these verses: Benares cloth like this, White and clean, can endure being dyed. On being pounded, it becomes soft, Shiny, colorful, and increasingly attractive. Honored One, you should know that what is proclaimed by tathāgatas, those free from attachment and fully awakened, is also like this. It can endure questioning by others, it can take reflection and examination. It takes the dye of wisdom; it does not take the dye of foolishness. The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said, “Householder, you have been converted by the magic spell of the renunciant Gotama.” The householder Upāli said: Honored One, that magic spell is good; that magic spell is extremely good. Honored One, that magic spell [will] lead my parents to obtain profit, benefit, peace, and happiness for a long time; and it [will] lead my wife, my servants, my employees, the king of Nāḷandā, and the entire world with its _deva_ s, _māra_ s, Brahmās, renunciants and brahmins, from human beings to _deva_ s, to obtain profit, benefit, peace, and happiness for a long time. The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said, “Householder, all the people of Nāḷandā know that the householder Upāli is a disciple of the Nigaṇṭhas. Whose disciple is he now?” Then the householder Upāli rose from his seat, placed his right knee on

the ground, extended his hands with palms together in the direction of the Buddha, and said:

Honored One, please listen to what I shall say. Mighty and powerful, free from ignorance, Having abandoned the defilements and subdued them totally; Without opponents, [engaging] in subtle reflection, Having practiced moral discipline, meditative samādhi, and wisdom; At peace and without defilement— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli. A great noble one who has completed the practice, And attained virtue and mastery in teaching; Well [established] in mindfulness, with subtle right contemplation, Not [judging] as high or low; Imperturbable, always at ease— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli. Free from distortion, always contented, Having discarded stinginess and attained satisfaction; A renunciant who has attained awakening, [Bearing] his last body, to be honored as a Great Person; Incomparable, free from the dust [of passion]— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli. Free from disease, immeasurable, Very profound, having become a seer; Always at peace, courageous, Abiding in the Dharma, with subtle reflection; Tamed, happy without entertainment— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli. A great nāga, happily abiding in a high position, The fetters exhausted, liberation attained; Appropriately eloquent in debate, pure, With wisdom arisen, free from distress and grief; The Sakyan, who will not return to this existence— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli.

Having fared rightly, meditating and reflecting, Without disturbance, pure; Always smiling, without hatred, Delighting in seclusion, having attained the highest; Fearless, always focused on the essence— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli.

The seventh Seer, without equal, Endowed with the threefold knowledge, attained to the holy [life]; Washed clean, like a bright lamp, Attained to stillness, the fetter of hatred ended; Courageous and supremely pure— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli.

Attained to stillness, with wisdom [wide as] the earth, Great wisdom that removes worldly greed; Worthy of offerings,^40 [endowed with] the supreme eye, A superior person, without equal; A leader, devoid of hatred— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli.

With desire abandoned, the unsurpassable good [attained], Well tamed, an incomparable leader; The supreme one, always joyous, Without perplexity, possessing [inner] light; With self-conceit abandoned, unsurpassably awakened— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli.

With craving abandoned, incomparably awakened, Without the “smoke,” without the “flame” of existence; Thus gone is the Well-gone One, Incomparable, without equal; Named “Attainer of Perfection”— [Such is] the Buddha, whose disciple is Upāli.

This is the Buddha [worthy of] a hundred praises,^41 [With qualities] not previously contemplated; When Upāli spoke [of them],

The deva s came to him, To help him well and add eloquence, In accordance with the Dharma and in accordance with his person. To the question of the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, [He replied, “I am] a disciple of the Buddha with ten powers.” The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta asked, “Householder, from what motive do you praise the renunciant Gotama?” The householder Upāli answered: Honored One, allow me to speak a simile. On hearing a simile, a wise person understands its implications. Just as a skilled garland maker or their apprentice plucks various kinds of flowers and ties them with long strings to make various kinds of garlands, in the same way, Honored One, the Tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened, has innumerable titles of praise. It is in order to honor him that I speak these praises. When this teaching [by the Buddha] had been delivered, [the mind of] the householder Upāli had become aloof from the dust of defilements, and [in regard] to all phenomena the Dharma eye arose [in him]. The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta [however], vomited hot blood. He went to Pāvā where, because of this serious affliction, he soon died.^42 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the house holder Upāli was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma133-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN12.11]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA133]]
> ◄  [[ma132-bdk]] 📜  [[ma134-bdk]] ►
