---
sutta_code: "MA130"
sutta_title:
  - "教曇彌 "
  - "Teaching Dhammika"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA130]]
> ◄  [[ma129-bdk]] 📜  [[ma132-bdk]] ►

### 130. The Discourse on  Teaching Dhammika

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time Venerable Dhammika was an elder in his native region. He was in charge of the stupa, and he held a senior position relative to [others, but he] was irascible, impatient, and very coarse, [given to] berating and condemning other monks. Because of this, all the [other] monks of [Dham- mika’s] native region left and went away. They did not enjoy staying there. Then the laymen of the region, seeing that all the monks of the region were leaving and going away, because they did not enjoy staying there, thought, “Why do all the monks of the region leave and go away, not delighting in staying here?” The laymen of the region heard about Venerable Dhammika, an elder in his native region, [as follows]. He was in charge of the stupa and he held a senior position relative to [others, but he] was irascible, impatient, and very

coarse, [given to] berating and condemning other monks. Because of this, all the [other] monks of [Dhammika’s] native region left and went away. They did not enjoy staying there. Hearing this, the laymen of [Dhammika’s] birthplace together approached Venerable Dhammika and expelled him from the monasteries of his native region.^421 At this Venerable Dhammika, having been expelled from the monasteries of his native region by the laymen of his native region, took his robes and bowl and headed for Sāvatthī. Traveling in stages, he reached Sāvatthī and stayed in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. Then Venerable Dhammika approached the Buddha, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. He said: World-honored One, I did not revile the laymen of my native region, I did not berate them, I did not give offense to them. Yet the laymen of my native region have driven me from the monasteries of my native region. Then the World-honored One told him, “Stop, Dhammika! Stop! Why do you need to say this?”^422 Venerable Dhammika extended his hands with palms together toward the Buddha, and again said: World-honored One, I did not revile the laymen of my native region, I did not berate them, I did not give offense to them. Yet the laymen of my native region have driven me from the monasteries of my native region. The World-honored One again addressed him: Dhammika, long ago merchants here in Jambudīpa would set out on the ocean by boat, carrying with them a land-seeking bird of prey. Before going far on the great ocean, they would release the land-seeking bird of prey. If the land-seeking bird of prey was able to reach the coast of the great ocean, it would not return to the boat; but if the land-seeking bird of prey was not able to reach the coast of the great ocean, it would return to the boat. In the same way, Dhammika, since you have been expelled from the monasteries of your native region by the laymen of your native region, you return to me. Stop, Dhammika! Stop! Why do you need to say this again? A third time Venerable Dhammika said:

World-honored One, I did not revile the laymen of my native region, I did not berate them, I did not give offense to them. Yet the laymen of my native region have driven me from the monasteries of my native region. A third time the World-honored One addressed him: Dhammika, when you were expelled from the monasteries of your native region by the laymen of your native region, did you abide by the Dharma of a renunciant? At this Venerable Dhammika rose from his seat, extended his hands with palms together toward the Buddha, and said, “World-honored One, how does a renunciant abide by the Dharma of a renunciant?” The World-honored One said: Dhammika, long ago the human life span was eighty thousand years. Dhammika, when the human life span was eighty thousand years, this continent of Jambudīpa was very wealthy and pleasant, with many inhab- itants; villages and cities were as close [together] as the distance of the flight of a single rooster. Dhammika, when the human life span was eighty thousand years, women married at the age of five hundred years. Dhammika, when the human life span was eighty thousand years, there were [only] such ailments as [needing to] defecate and urinate, having desires, having nothing to eat, and growing old. Dhammika, when the human life span was eighty thousand years, there was a king called Koravya, a wheel-turning monarch, intelligent and wise, equipped with a fourfold army to reign over the entire world. Being a righteous Dharma king, he possessed the seven treasures. Those seven treasures are: the wheel treasure, the elephant treasure, the horse treasure, the jewel treasure, the woman treasure, the steward treasure, and the counselor treasure— these are the seven. He had a thousand sons who were handsome, brave, fearless, and able to overcome other people. He certainly ruled over the whole earth, as far as the ocean, without relying on sword or club, gov- erning only by the Dharma, bringing peace and happiness [to all].^423 Dhammika, King Koravya had a tree called Well-established, a royal banyan tree. Dhammika, the royal banyan tree Well-established had five branches: the first branch provided nourishment for the king and queen;

the second one provided nourishment for the crown prince and courtiers; the third one provided nourishment for the countrymen; the fourth one provided nourishment for renunciants and brahmins; the fifth one provided nourishment for birds and beasts. Dhammika, the fruits of the royal banyan tree Well-established were as big as a two-pint bottle, and tasted like pure honeyballs. Dhammika, the royal banyan tree Well-established was not guarded, [yet] no one stole from it. [Then one day] a man came, hungry and thirsty, very weak, with a wan and sallow appearance, wanting to eat the fruit, so he approached the royal banyan tree Well-established. After having eaten his fill of fruit he broke off a branch bearing fruit and left. There was a deva who dwelled in dependence on the royal banyan tree Well-established. He thought, “How odd is this man of Jambudīpa! He lacks gratitude and appreciation. Why is that? Because, having eaten his fill of fruit from the royal banyan tree Well-established, he broke off a branch bearing fruit and took it away. Let me cause the royal banyan tree Well-established to become devoid of fruit and not bear [any more] fruit.” Then the royal banyan tree Well-established became devoid of fruit and did not bear [any more] fruit. Another man came by, hungry and thirsty, very weak, with wan and sallow appearance, wanting to eat the fruit, so he approached the royal banyan tree Well-established. Seeing that the royal banyan tree Well established had become devoid of fruit and was not producing [any more] fruit, he approached King Koravya and said, “May your majesty know that the royal banyan tree Well-established has become devoid of fruit and is not producing [any more] fruit.”^424 On hearing this, just as [quickly as the time it takes for] a strong man to bend his arm or stretch it out, King Koravya disappeared from Kuru [country] and arrived in the Heaven of the Thirty-three. Standing before Sakka, ruler of the deva s, he said, “May Kosiya know that the royal banyan tree Well-established has become devoid of fruit and does not produce [any more] fruit.” Then, just as [quickly as the time it takes for] a strong man to bend his arm or stretch it out, Sakka, ruler of the deva s, and King Koravya disap peared from the Heaven of the Thirty-three and arrived in Kuru [country].

Standing not far from the royal banyan tree Well-established, Sakka, ruler of the _deva_ s, performed a feat of supernormal powers to create a great rainstorm. After he had created the great rainstorm, the royal banyan tree Well-established was uprooted and fell over. Because of this, the tree _deva_ who dwelled in the royal banyan tree Well-established was sorrowful and distressed. Weeping and shedding tears, he stood before Sakka, ruler of the _deva_ s. Sakka, ruler of the _deva_ s, asked him, “ _Deva,_ why are you sorrowful and distressed, standing before me weeping and shedding tears?” The _deva_ said, “May Kosiya know that, because of the great rainstorm the royal banyan tree Well-established has been uprooted and fell over.” Then Sakka, ruler of the _deva_ s, said to the tree _deva_ , “Tree _deva,_ when the royal banyan tree Well-established was uprooted and fell over due to the great rainstorm, did you abide by the Dharma of a tree _deva_ ?” The tree _deva_ said, “Kosiya, how does a tree _deva_ abide by the Dharma of a tree _deva_ ?” Sakka, ruler of the _deva_ s, told him: “ _Deva,_ suppose that someone wants to dig up the roots of a tree and take them away; suppose that he wants to cut the stem of the tree, the branches of the tree, the leaves of the tree, the flowers of the tree, the fruits of the tree, and take them away. The tree _deva_ should not become angry, should not dislike him for it; he should not harbor hatred in his heart. The tree _deva_ should abandon such states of mind and [just] dwell there as a tree _deva._ This is how a tree _deva_ abides by the Dharma of a tree _deva._ ” The _deva_ said further, “Kosiya, I am a tree _deva_ who did not abide by the Dharma of a tree _deva._ From now on, being a tree _deva,_ I will abide by the Dharma of a tree _deva._ May the royal banyan tree Well-established recover and be as it was before!” Then Sakka, ruler of the _deva_ s, employed his supernormal powers to again create a great rainstorm. After he had created the great rainstorm, the royal banyan tree Well-established recovered and was as before. It is the same, Dhammika, with a monk. He does not berate someone who berates him; he does not become angry with someone who becomes angry with him; he does not injure someone who injures him; and he does not beat someone who beats him. In this way, Dhammika, a renunciant abides by the Dharma of a renunciant.

Then Venerable Dhammika rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with palms together toward the Buddha, and, weeping and shedding tears, said: World-honored One, I am a renunciant who did not abide by the Dharma of a renunciant. From now on, being a renunciant, I will abide by the Dharma of a renunciant. The World-honored One said: Dhammika, long ago there was a great teacher called Sunetta, a leader of heterodox seers, who had abandoned sensual desire and [sensual] craving and had acquired supernormal powers. Dhammika, the great teacher Sunetta had countless hundreds and thousands of disciples. Dhammika, the great teacher Sunetta taught his disciples the method for [attaining] the Brahmā world. Dhammika, when the great teacher Sunetta taught [his disciples] the method for [attaining] the Brahmā world, some of the disciples who did not completely accept and practice his method were reborn after death into the Heaven of the Four Kings, some were reborn into the Heaven of the Thirty-three, some were reborn into the Yāma Heaven, some were reborn into the Tusita Heaven, some were reborn into the Heaven of Those Who Delight in Creating, and some were reborn into the Heaven of Those Who Delight in the Creations of Others.^425 Dhammika, when the great teacher Sunetta taught [his disciples] the method for [attaining] the Brahmā world, those disciples who completely accepted and practiced his method developed the four divine abodes and abandoned sensual desire, and after death they attained rebirth into the Brahmā world. Then, Dhammika, the great teacher Sunetta thought, “It is not proper for me to be on the same level in the next life as my disciples by being reborn in the same place. Let me now instead practice a more developed form of loving-kindness. After practicing this more developed form of loving-kindness, after death I will attain rebirth into the Heaven of Streaming Radiance (Ābhassara).” Dhammika, at a later time the great teacher Sunetta practiced a more developed form of loving-kindness. Having practiced that more developed

form of loving-kindness, after death he attained rebirth into the Heaven of Streaming Radiance. Dhammika, the path of practice of the great teacher Sunetta and his disciples was not in vain. It yielded great fruits. Just like the great teacher Sunetta, so too were [six other great teachers]: Mūgapakkha, the brahmin Aranemi, the teacher Kuddālaka, the young brahmin Hatthipāla, Jotipāla, [and his father] Govinda: these were the “seven [brahmin] chaplains” ( _satta purohita_ ).^426 Dhammika, these seven chaplains and teachers also had countless hun- dreds and thousands of disciples. Dhammika, these seven chaplains and teachers taught their disciples the method for [attaining] the Brahmā world. When the seven chaplains and teachers taught [their disciples] the method for [attaining] the Brahmā world, some of the disciples who did not com- pletely accept and practice his method were reborn after death into the Heaven of the Four Kings, some were reborn into the Heaven of the Thirty- three, some were reborn into the Yāma Heaven, some were reborn into Tusita Heaven, some were reborn into the Heaven of Those Who Delight in Creating, and some were reborn into the Heaven of Those Who Delight in the Creations of Others. When the seven chaplains and teachers taught [their disciples] the method for [attaining] the Brahmā world, those disciples who completely accepted and practiced his method developed the four divine abodes and abandoned sensual desire, and after death they attained rebirth into the Brahmā world. Dhammika, then [each of] the seven chaplains and teachers thought, “It is not proper that I, in the next life, should be on the same level as my disciples by being reborn in the same place. Let me instead practice a more developed kind of loving-kindness. After practicing that more developed kind of loving-kindness, after death I will attain rebirth into the Heaven of Streaming Radiance.” Dhammika, then subsequently the seven chaplains and teachers prac- ticed a more developed form of loving-kindness. Having practiced that more developed form of loving-kindness, after death they attained rebirth into the Heaven of Streaming Radiance. Dhammika, the path of practice of the seven chaplains and teachers and [their] disciples was not in vain. It yielded great fruits.

Dhammika, if anyone had berated those seven teachers and their retinue of countless hundreds and thousands, if anyone had beaten them, become angry with them, or condemned them, then that person would certainly have been committing an immeasurably serious offense. As for a disciple of the Buddha who has achieved right view, a monk who has attained [such] a lesser fruit, if anyone were to berate him, beat him, become angry with him, or condemn him, that person would be com mitting an even more serious offense. Therefore, Dhammika, you [and your fellow monks] should protect one another. Why is that? After you have abandoned this fault there will be no further loss [for you]. Thereupon the World-honored One uttered these verses: Sunetta, Mūgapakkha, The brahmin Aranemi, The teacher Kuddālaka, The young brahmin Hatthipāla, Jotipāla, and [his father] Govinda— [These were] the seven chaplains. In the past These seven teachers were renowned for their virtue, Free of the bond of [sensual] craving, delighting in compassion, And with the fetter of sensual desire completely transcended. They had disciples, Countless hundreds and thousands of them, Who had also abandoned the fetter of sensual desire, But only momentarily, not yet totally. In the case of those heterodox seers, Who protected themselves well when practicing asceticism, Anyone who with hatred and jealousy in his mind Derided them, would have been committing a serious offense. In the case of a disciple of the Buddha who has attained right view, Who is established in a lesser fruit,

Anyone who might deride, condemn, or attack him Would be committing an even more serious offense. Therefore, Dhammika, You [and your fellow monks] should protect one another. You should protect one another because There is no offense more serious than this. [It causes] suffering so severe That the noble ones abhor it. One will certainly receive disapproving looks If he flagrantly adopts this position based on wrong view. One who is the lowest grade of person, As explained in the noble Dharma, Namely one who has not yet abandoned sensual passion, Has acquired to a very small degree the five faculties:^427 Faith, energy, the establishment of mindfulness, Right samādhi, and right insight. One who [derides, condemns, or attacks someone] like this will receive this suffering: Facing the experience of one’s own ruin. One will experience one’s own ruin After harming others. [But] if one can protect oneself, One can then protect others. Therefore, one should protect oneself; [In this way] the wise [achieve] lasting happiness. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Dhammika and the [other] monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma130-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.117]], [[AN10.118]], [[AN10.169]], [[AN10.170]], [[SN45.34]], [[SN46.17]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN3.61]], [[AN3.99]], [[AN7.62]], [[MA13]], [[SN35.145]], [[SN36.21]], [[SN42.11]], [[SN42.8]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA130]]
> ◄  [[ma129-bdk]] 📜  [[ma132-bdk]] ►
