---
sutta_code: "MA134"
sutta_title:
  - "釋問 "
  - "Sakka’s Questions"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA134]]
> ◄  [[ma133-bdk]] 📜  [[ma135-bdk]] ►

### 134. The Discourse on the Questions of Sakka

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling in the Magadha country, staying in the Indasāla cave on Mount Vediya, north of Mango Grove village to the east of Rājagaha. At that time Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, heard that the Buddha was dwelling in the Magadha country, staying in the Indasāla cave on Mount Vediya, north of Mango Grove village in the Magadha country to the east of Rājagaha. Then Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, told the gandhabba Pañcasikha: I have heard that the World-honored One is dwelling in the Magadha country, staying in the Indasāla cave on Mount Vediya, north of Mango

Grove village in the Magadha country to the east of Rājagaha. Pañcasikha, you come along with me to visit the Buddha. The _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha answered, “Very well.” Then the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha, carrying a glazed lute, went together with Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s. The _deva_ s of the Thirty-three heard that Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, had again the wish to go and visit the Buddha; so the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three also accompanied Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s. Then, just as quickly as a strong man might flex his arm or stretch it out, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three, and the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha suddenly vanished from the Heaven of the Thirty-three and reap- peared at a place not far from the cave on Mount Vediya, north of Mango Grove village, in the Magadha country to the east of Rājagaha. Then Mount Vediya shone with a light as bright as fire. Seeing this, the people living around the mountain thought, “Mount Vediya is on fire, burning everywhere.” Then, having come to stay there at a certain place, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, said:

Pañcasikha, the World-honored One stays like this in secluded places, under the trees in some mountain forest. He is happy to dwell on some high mountain ridge, which is quiet, without sound, remote, without any- thing bad and without people. There he sits in solitude at his ease, impres- sive in his virtue. [We] _deva_ s have gathered here, enjoying his remoteness, sitting peacefully in seclusion, and abiding in happiness. Since we have not yet notified him, we should not go ahead directly. Pañcasikha, you approach him first to notify him. After that we will move forward. The _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha answered, “Very well.” Then, the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha, having received this instruction from Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, took up his glazed lute and went ahead to the Indasāla cave. Then he thought, “I know that this spot is neither too far from the Buddha nor too near to him. Let the Buddha know I am here by hearing my voice!” Remaining at that spot, he tuned his glazed lute and sang verses associated with desire, verses associated with _nāga_ s, verses associated with renunciants, and verses associated with arahants. He sang these verses:^44

Bhaddā, I pay homage to your parents:

Moon and Timbaru. They gave birth to you, the beautiful one Who makes my heart rejoice. Oppressed by heat, one seeks a cool breeze, Thirsty, one desires to drink cold water. Similarly I cherish you, As an arahant cherishes the Dharma. As difficult as gathering up spilled water— Such is my clinging and desire To be together [with you] for countless lifetimes, As [a reward for past] offerings made to those free from attachment. The pool has clear, cool water, With golden grains of sand on the bottom. Like an elephant oppressed by heat Entering this pool to bathe, Or like an elephant spurred on with a goad— So has my mind surrendered to you. You do not realize what I will do, [If] I do not obtain you, graceful one. My mind is so attached to you, Impatience and discontent burn my heart. Hence I am unhappy Like a man in a tiger’s mouth. Like the Sakyan son practicing meditation, Constantly happy in [mental] unification. Like a sage on attaining awakening, Just as wonderful [for me] would it be to obtain you. Just as a sage enjoys The unsurpassable right awakening, Similarly what I would enjoy Is to obtain you, whom I constantly desire.

Like medicine, which a sick person desires to get, Like food, which a hungry person desires to get, Like water, which [can] extinguish a fire, Are you, Bhaddā, who [could] calm my mind. Whatever merit I have made By offering to those free from attachment, To all those who are superbly pure, May you and I receive the reward! I wish I could be with you until the end, Never separated from you nor living alone.^45 Let me die together with you, Rather than live separated [from you]. May Sakka, honored by the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three, Grant me my wish! You, the person I honor most, Are my most constant wish. Therefore I salute the Great Hero, Bowing my head to the supreme human being, Who has discarded all the thorns of craving. I salute the Kinsman of the Sun (the Buddha). At this the World-honored One rose from his meditative samādhi and praised the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha:

Well done! Well done, Pañcasikha! The sound of your singing was in har mony with the sound of your lute; and the sound of your lute was in har mony with the sound of your singing. The sound of your singing did not go beyond the sound of your lute; and the sound of your lute did not go beyond the sound of your singing. Pañcasikha, do you remember having in the past recited these verses associated with desire, verses associated with nāga s, verses associated with renunciants, and verses associated with arahants? The gandhabba Pañcasikha answered:

World-honored One, the Great Seer would know that himself. Great Seer, in the distant past when the World-honored One had just attained the path of awakening, he was dwelling at Uruvela, on the bank of the Nerañjarā River, under the goatherds’ banyan tree. At that time the daughter of the gandhabba king Timbaru, named Bhaddā, was being courted by a deva named Sikha, a son of the royal charioteer Mātali. Great Seer, while he was courting that girl, I too was courting a girl. However, Great Seer, I was unable to obtain the girl I was courting. At that time I stood behind the girl and sang the verses associated with desire, the verses associated with nāga s, the verses associated with renun ciants, and the verses associated with arahants. Great Seer, when I sang these verses, the girl turned around happily and, with a smile, told me, “Pañcasikha, I have not yet seen the Buddha, the World-honored One. However, I have heard from the deva s of the Thirty-three that the World honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, perfect in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, a leader on the path of Dharma, a teacher of deva s and human beings, a buddha, an exalted one. Pañcasikha, if you are able to praise the World-honored One frequently, I can go with you to pay homage to the Great Seer. But I will meet with you only this once. After that we will not meet again.” At this point Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, thought, “The gandhabba Pañ casikha has caused the World-honored One to emerge from his samādhi, enabling me to get through to the Well-gone One.” Then Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, said: Pañcasikha, approach and in my name bow your head in homage at the Buddha’s feet. Inquire from the World-honored One whether the Noble One is healthy in body, whether he is at peace, happy, and without disease, whether he is at ease, and whether his energy is as usual. Say this: “Great Seer, Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, pays homage at the Buddha’s feet, and inquires from the World-honored One whether he is healthy in body, whether he is at peace, happy, and without disease, whether he is at ease, and whether his energy is as usual. Great Seer, Sakka, the ruler of the

_deva_ s, together with the Thirty-three _deva_ s would like to see the World- honored One.” The _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha answered, “Very well.” Then the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha put down his glazed lute, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:

World-honored One, Great Seer, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, pays homage at the Buddha’s feet, and inquires from the World-honored One whether the Noble One is healthy in body, whether he is at peace, happy, and with- out disease, whether he is at ease, and whether his energy is as usual. Great Seer, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, together with the Thirty-three- _deva_ s, wishes to see the World-honored One. Then the World-honored One said: Pañcasikha, may Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, be now at peace and happy, and may all the _deva_ s, human beings, _asura_ s, _gandhabba_ s, _yakkha_ s, as well as the various other groups [of beings] be at peace and happy. Pañ- casikha, if Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, wishes to see me, then let him do as he wishes. Then the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha, having heard what the Buddha said, received it well and kept it [in mind]. He paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. He approached Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, and told him, “Your Majesty, I have spoken on your behalf with the World-honored One. The World-honored One is now waiting for Your Majesty. May Your Majesty know the right time.” Thereupon, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, along with the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three and the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha, approached the Buddha. Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet and announced his name three times, “Indeed, Great Seer, I am Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s; I am Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s.” Then the World-honored One said, “It is like this, Kosiya, it is like this. You are Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s.” Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, having announced his name three times, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and

stood to one side. The _deva_ s of the Thirty-three and the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha also paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and stood to one side. Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, said, “Great Seer, how far away should I sit from the World-honored One?” The World-honored One said, “You may sit near to me. Why is that? Because you have a large retinue of divine retainers.” Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. The _deva_ s of the Thirty-three and the _gandhabba_ Pañca - sikha also paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. At that time the Indasāla cave suddenly became wider. Why was that? It happened owing to the majesty of the Buddha and the power of the _deva_ s. Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, having sat down, said: Great Seer, for a long time I have wanted to visit the World-honored One, wanting to ask questions about the Dharma. Great Seer, once in the distant past the World-honored One was dwelling at Sāvatthī, staying in a cave. Great Seer, at that time, on account of myself and the _deva_ s of the Thirty- three, a chariot drawn by a thousand elephants was being driven toward the dwelling of the Great [Heavenly] King Vessavaṇa. At that time there was a concubine named Bhuñjatī in the household of King Vessavaṇa. At that time the World-honored One had entered quiet meditative samādhi. The concubine was extending her hands with joined palms in reverence toward the feet of the World-honored One. Great Seer, I told her, “Sister, now is not the right time for me to visit the World-honored One, [since] the World-honored One has entered med- itative samādhi.^46 Sister, when the World-honored One emerges from meditative samādhi, pay homage in my name at the Buddha’s feet and inquire from the World-honored One whether the Noble One is healthy in body, whether he is at peace, happy, and without disease, whether he is at ease, and whether his energy is as usual. Say this: ‘Great Seer, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, pays homage at the Buddha’s feet, and inquires of the World-honored One whether he is healthy in body, whether he is at peace, happy, and without disease, whether he is at ease, and whether his energy is as usual.’”

Great Seer, did that sister pay homage in my name at the Buddha’s feet and greet the World-honored One? Does the World-honored One remember that?

The World-honored One said:

Kosiya, I do remember that sister paying homage with her head at my feet in your name and greeting me as you had intended. Kosiya, I also remember hearing the noise made at the time of your departure, which roused me from my meditative samādhi.

[Sakka said:]

Great Seer, in the distant past I heard that when there appears in the world a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowl- edge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, a leader on the path of Dharma, a teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one, at that time the _deva_ s increase [in number], and the _asura_ s decrease. Great Seer, with my own eyes I have seen disciples of the World-hon- ored One, and monks who had followed the World-honored One and prac- ticed the holy life, who having [temporarily] discarded sensual desire, becoming secluded from sensual desire, on the breaking up of the body after death reappeared in a good realm of existence, being reborn in heaven. Great Seer, the Sakyan woman Gopikā was such a disciple of the World- honored One. She too followed the World-honored One and practiced the holy life. She detested her female body and desired to have a male appear- ance, to move out of her female body and acquire a male form. Having [temporarily] discarded sensual desire and become secluded from sensual desire, on the breaking up of the body after death, [she/he] reappeared in a sublime realm of existence, among the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three, as my son. Since he was reborn [there], all the _deva_ s knew that the _deva_ Gopaka is endowed with great bases of supernormal power, great power, great merit, and great authoritative power. Again, Great Seer, I have seen three monks, disciples of the World- honored One, who also had followed the World-honored One and practiced the holy life [but] had not discarded sensual desire nor become secluded

from sensual desire. On the breaking up of the body after death they were reborn in another lowly gandhabba palace. After rebirth, they came to the deva s of the Thirty-three every day to serve all the deva s and attend on Gopaka, a son of deva s. On seeing them, the son of deva s [Gopaka] spoke these verses:^47 I was a laywoman possessing the eye [of Dharma], My name was Gopikā. I extended respect to the Buddha and the Dharma, And served the Sangha [of monks] with pure intention. By grace of the Buddha’s favor, The great merit of the Sakyan son, I came to sublime birth among the Thirty-three, Known to them as a fortunate son of deva s. Seeing those former monks, [Now] reborn as gandhabba s, Standing before me, extending their hands with joined palms, I, Gopaka, spoke to them in verses: [You] were formerly disciples of Gotama, While I was formerly a human being. You came to my house And I offered you fine food and drink. You were formerly equal to noble ones, Practicing the unsurpassable holy life. Yet now you are subservient to others, Coming daily to serve the deva s. Formerly I served you. I heard the Noble One teaching the Dharma well. I gained faith, became accomplished in morality, And came to sublime birth [among] the Thirty-three. You were formerly served, Practicing the unsurpassable holy life.

Yet now you are subservient to others, Coming daily to serve the _deva_ s.

In which direction will you head, After having received the Buddha’s Dharma? Have you turned your backs on the Dharma, Well taught by the one who certainly has awakened vision?

I saw you all in the distant past; Now you are reborn as lowly _gandhabba_ s. By yourselves you practiced inappropriately, By yourselves you took rebirth inappropriately.^48

I was formerly a householder. Look at me now, endowed with excellent merit! Transformed from a female into a son of _deva_ s, Freely enjoying the five kinds of sensual pleasure.

Being scolded as sons of Gotama,^49 They wearily lamented, “Gotama, We should now advance in practice, As the son of _deva_ s (Gopaka) has rightly said.”

Two of them practiced energetically, Remembering Gotama’s Dharma and discipline. Knowing the perils of desire, They promptly discarded desire, became separated from it.

Having been bound by the fetter of desire, They promptly succeeded in discarding it and leaving it far behind. Like an elephant breaking out of its harness, They went beyond the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three And the _deva_ s Indra and Brahmā, Who had all come together in an assembly.

Seated on their [meditation] seats, they promptly left [the _deva_ s behind], Having heroically discarded the dust of sensual desire.

Seeing this, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, became dismayed [and exclaimed], “They have outdone the _deva_ s, the _deva_ s among _deva_ s! Formerly born into a lowly [sphere], They have gone beyond the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three!” In subtle quiet words [he had expressed his] dismay. After that Gopaka said: Among human beings, the Buddha is supreme, The Sakyan Sage, who knows about sensual desire. Among his sons [these ones] had lost mindfulness, [But] after my scolding, they recovered it again. One of the three Has been reborn among the _gandhabba_ s. [The other] two attained the right path, Being in heaven they delight in the faculty of samādhi. The Dharma you have taught is like this, Disciples become free of perplexity, Overcome the taints, discard erroneous doubt, And pay homage to the Buddha, the supreme one with subdued faculties. They awakened to the teachings And were both able to ascend to a better realm. After having ascended, They were reborn among the Brahmā _deva_ s. We know that Dharma, Great Seer, [therefore] we have come here. At that time the World-honored One thought, “This spirit has for a long time been free of flattery; he is without deception, without delusions, and is of upright character. If he asks, it is because he wants to know fully; he does not [just] want to get in touch and be entertained. It is the same with the ques- tions he will ask. Let me explain the profound higher Dharma [to him].”

Having understood this, the World-honored One spoke these verses to Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s:

For the sake of present happiness, And for happiness in future existences, Kosiya, you may ask without restriction According to what pleases your mind. Each question asked, Will be completely resolved for you. The World-honored One allows it Saying, “The deva ’s request is seen as merited.” In this Magadha country, Let the worthy Vāsava (Sakka) pose his questions!^50 At this Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, said: World-honored One, as to deva s, human beings, asura s, gandhabba s, yakkha s, as well as the various other kinds and groups [of beings], how many fetters does each of them have? On hearing this, the World-honored One replied: Kosiya, as to deva s, human beings, asura s, gandhabba s, yakkha s, as well as the various other kinds and groups [of beings], each of them has two fetters, namely, stinginess and jealousy. Each of them thinks, “May I be without bonds, without fetters, without resentment, without hatred, without conflict, without fighting, without dukkha, and let me dwell at ease!” Yet, despite thinking like this, each of them has bonds, has fetters, has resentment, has conflict, has fighting, has dukkha, and does not dwell at ease. Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. Each god, human being, asura, gandhabba, yakkha, as well as each of the various other kinds and groups [of beings] has these two fetters. Each of them thinks, “May I be without bonds, without fetters, without resent ment, without hatred, without conflict, without fighting, without dukkha,

and let me dwell at ease!” Yet, despite thinking like this, each of them has bonds, has fetters, has resentment, has conflict, has fighting, has dukkha, and does not dwell at ease. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and gone beyond perplexity, and I am without uncertainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. Then Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further: Great Seer, as to stinginess and jealousy, what is their cause, what is their condition? From where do they arise, by what do they exist; and by what cause is there no stinginess and jealousy? On hearing this, the World-honored One replied: Kosiya, as to stinginess and jealousy, their cause is liking and disliking, their condition is liking and disliking. From liking and disliking they arise, by liking and disliking they exist; if there is no liking and disliking, then there is no stinginess and jealousy. Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. As to stinginess and jealousy, their cause is liking and disliking, their con dition is liking and disliking. From liking and disliking they arise, by liking and disliking they exist; if there is no liking and disliking, then there is no stinginess and jealousy. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. Then Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further: Great Seer, as to liking and disliking, what is their cause, what is their

condition? From where do they arise, by what do they exist, and by what cause is there no liking and disliking? On hearing this, the World-honored One answered: Kosiya, as to liking and disliking, their cause is desire, their condition is desire. From desire they arise, by desire they exist; if there is no desire, then there is no liking and disliking. Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. As to liking and disliking, their cause is desire, their condition is desire. From desire they arise, by desire they exist; if there is no desire, then there is no liking and disliking. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer- tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further:

Great Seer, as to desire, what is its cause, what is its condition? From where does it arise, by what does it exist; and by what cause is there no desire? On hearing this, the World-honored One answered: Kosiya, as to desire, its cause is [desirous] thinking, its condition is [desirous] thinking. From [desirous] thinking it arises, by [desirous] think ing it exists; if there is no [desirous] thinking, then there is no desire. Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. As to desire, its cause is [desirous] thinking, its condition is [desirous] thinking. By [desirous] thinking it arises, by [desirous] thinking it exists; if there is no [desirous] thinking, then there is no desire.

Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. Then Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further: Great Seer, as to [desirous] thinking, what is its cause, what is its condition? From what does it arise, by what does it exist; and by what cause is there no [desirous] thinking? On hearing this, the World-honored One answered: Kosiya, as to [desirous] thinking, its cause is [desirous] intention, its con dition is [desirous] intention.^51 From [desirous] intention it arises, because of [desirous] intention it exists; if there is no [desirous] intention, then there is no [desirous] thinking. Because of [desirous] thinking, there is desire; because of desire, there is liking and disliking; because of liking and disliking, there is stinginess and jealousy; because of stinginess and jealousy, there is [the using of] sword and club, dissension and quarreling, hatred and jealousy, flattery and deception, false speech and divisive speech. Thus countless evil and unwholesome states arise in the mind. In this way this entire great mass of dukkha arises. If there is no [desirous] intention, then there is no [desirous] thinking; if there is no [desirous] thinking, then there is no desire; if there is no desire, then there is no liking and disliking; if there is no liking and disliking, then there is no stinginess and jealousy; if there is no stinginess and jealousy, then there is no [using of] sword and club, no dissension and quarreling, no hatred and jealousy, no flattery and deception, and no false speech and divisive speech. Thus countless evil and unwholesome states do not arise in the mind. In this way this entire great mass of dukkha ceases. Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. As to [desirous] thinking, its cause is [desirous] intention, its condition is [desirous] intention. From [desirous] intention it arises, because of

[desirous] intention it exists; if there is no [desirous] intention, then there is no [desirous] thinking. Because of [desirous] thinking, there is desire; because of desire, there is liking and disliking; because of liking and dis- liking, there is stinginess and jealousy; because of stinginess and jealousy, there is [the using of] sword and club, dissension and quarreling, hatred and jealousy, flattery and deception, false speech and divisive speech. Thus countless evil and unwholesome states arise in the mind. In this way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ arises. If there is no [desirous] intention, then there is no [desirous] thinking; if there is no [desirous] thinking, then there is no desire; if there is no desire, then there is no liking and disliking; if there is no liking and disliking, then there is no stinginess and jealousy; if there is no stinginess and jealousy, then there is no [using of] sword and club, no dissension and quarreling, no hatred and jealousy, no flattery and deception, and no false speech and divisive speech. Thus countless evil and unwholesome states do not arise in the mind. In this way this entire great mass of _dukkha_ ceases. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer- tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. At that time Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further, “Great Seer, what is the path leading to the cessation of illusion? How does a monk practice to progress on the path leading to the cessation of illusion?” On hearing this, the World-honored One replied: Kosiya, as to the path leading to the cessation of illusion, it is what is called the noble eightfold path, the eight [factors] being right view... up to... right samādhi. Kosiya, this is the path leading to the cessation of illu- sion. A monk practices this path leading to the cessation of illusion.^52 Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. As to the path leading to the cessation of illusion, it is what is called the noble eightfold path, the eight [factors] being right view... up to...

right samādhi. Great Seer, this is the path leading to the cessation of illusion. A monk practices this path leading to the cessation of illusion. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. Then Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further, “Great Seer, as to a monk on the path leading to the cessation of illusion, how many factors does he discard, and how many factors does he practice?” On hearing this, the World-honored One replied: Kosiya, as to a monk on the path leading to the cessation of illusion, he discards three factors and practices three factors. What are the three? The first is thinking; the second is speech; the third is seeking.^53 Kosiya, as to thinking, I say there are two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. If [a line of] thinking should not be undertaken, I [say]: discard it immediately. If [a line of] thinking should be undertaken, I [say]: know the right time in order to actualize such thinking, with mindfulness and comprehension. As to speech it is the same. Kosiya, as to seeking, I say it is again of two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. If seeking should not be undertaken, I [say]: discard it immediately. If seeking should be undertaken, I [say]: know the right time in order to actualize such seek ing with mindfulness and comprehension. Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. As to a monk on the path leading to the cessation of illusion, he discards three factors and practices three factors. What are the three? The first is thinking; the second is speech; the third is seeking. The Great Seer has said that, as to thinking, there are two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken.

If [a line of] thinking increases evil and unwholesome states and decreases wholesome states, then the Great Seer [says]: discard it immediately. If [a line of] thinking decreases evil and unwholesome states and increases wholesome states, then the Great Seer [says]: know the right time in order to accomplish such [a line of] thinking with mindfulness and comprehen- sion. As to speech, it is the same. The Great Seer has said that as to seeking there are again two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. If seeking increases evil and unwholesome states and decreases wholesome states, then the Great Seer [says]: discard it immediately. If seeking decreases evil and unwholesome states and increases wholesome states, then the Great Seer [says]: know the right time in order to actualize such seeking with mindfulness and comprehension. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer- tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further:

Great Seer, as to a monk on the path leading to the cessation of illusion, how many factors is he endowed with, and how many factors does he practice to preserve the code of rules?^54 On hearing this, the World-honored One replied: Kosiya, as to a monk on the path leading to the cessation of illusion, he is endowed with six factors, and he practices six factors to preserve the code of rules. What are the six? They are: seeing forms with the eyes, hearing sounds with the ears, smelling odors with the nose, tasting flavors with the tongue, sensing tangibles with the body, and cognizing mental objects with the mind. Kosiya, as to seeing forms with the eyes, I say this is of two kinds, namely: that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. In the case of seeing forms with the eyes that should not be

undertaken, I [say]: discard it immediately. In the case of seeing forms with the eyes that should be undertaken, I [say]: know the right time in order to accomplish it with mindfulness and comprehension. It is the same with hearing sounds with the ears... smelling odors with the nose... tasting flavors with the tongue... sensing tangibles with the body. As to cognizing mental objects with the mind, I say this too is of two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. In the case of cognizing mental objects with the mind that should not be undertaken, I [say]: discard it immediately. In the case of cognizing mental objects with the mind that should be under taken, I [say]: know the right time in order to accomplish it with mind fulness and comprehension.^55 Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. As to a monk on the path leading to the cessation of illusion, he is endowed with six factors, and he practices six factors to preserve the code of rules. What are the six? They are: seeing forms with the eyes, hearing sounds with the ears, smelling odors with the nose, tasting flavors with the tongue, sensing tangibles with the body, and cognizing mental objects with the mind. The Great Seer has said that, as to seeing forms with the eyes, this is of two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. In the case of seeing forms with the eyes that increases evil and unwholesome states and decreases wholesome states, the Great Seer [says]: discard it immediately. In the case of seeing forms with the eyes that decreases evil and unwholesome states and increases wholesome states, the Great Seer [says]: know the right time in order to accomplish it with mindfulness and comprehension. It is the same with hearing sounds with the ears... smelling odors with the nose... tasting flavors with the tongue... sensing tangibles with the body. The Great Seer has said that cognizing mental objects with the mind is again of two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. In the case of cognizing mental objects with the mind that increases evil and unwholesome states and decreases wholesome states, the Great Seer [says]: abandon it immediately.

In the case of cognizing mental objects with the mind that decreases evil and unwholesome states and increases wholesome states, the Great Seer [says]: know the right time in order to accomplish it with mindfulness and comprehension. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer- tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further:

Great Seer, as to a monk on the path leading to the cessation of illusion, whose duration of existence is a single moment,^56 how many factors should he discard, and how many factors should he practice? On hearing this, the World-honored One answered: Kosiya, as to a monk on the path leading to the cessation of illusion, whose duration of existence is a single moment, he should discard three factors, and he should practice three factors. What are the three? The first is joy; the second is sadness; the third is equanimity. Kosiya, as to joy, I say that there are two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. As to joy of the kind that should not be undertaken, I [say]: discard it immediately. As to joy of the kind that should be undertaken, I [say]: know the right time in order to accomplish it with mindfulness and comprehension. As to sadness, it is the same.... Kosiya, as to equanimity, I say that there are again two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. As to equanimity of the kind that should not be undertaken, I [say]: discard it immediately. As to equanimity of the kind that should be undertaken, I [say]: know the right time in order to accomplish it with mindfulness and comprehension. Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer.

As to a monk on the path leading to the cessation of illusion, whose dura- tion of existence is a single moment, he should discard three factors, and he should practice three factors. What are the three? The first is joy; the second is sadness; the third is equanimity. The Great Seer said that, as to joy, there are two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. As to joy of the kind that increases evil and unwholesome states and decreases wholesome states, the Great Seer [says]: discard it immediately. As to joy of the kind that decreases evil and unwholesome states and increases wholesome states, the Great Seer [says]: know the right time in order to accomplish it with mindfulness and comprehension. As to sadness, it is the same.... The Great Seer has said that, as to equanimity, there are two kinds, namely that which should be undertaken and that which should not be undertaken. As to equanimity of the kind that increases evil and unwhole- some states and decreases wholesome states, the Great Seer [says]: elim- inate it immediately. As to equanimity of the kind that decreases evil and unwholesome states and increases wholesome states, the Great Seer [says]: know the right time in order to accomplish such equanimity with mind- fulness and comprehension. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer- tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further, “Great Seer, do all renunciants and brahmins have the same teaching, desire, liking, pleasure, and intention?” On hearing this, the World-honored One replied, “Kosiya, renunciants and brahmins do not all have the same teaching, desire, liking, pleasure, and intention.” Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, asked further, “Great Seer, for what reason do renunciants and brahmins not all have the same teaching, desire, liking, pleasure, and intention?”

On hearing this, the World-honored One replied: Kosiya, in this world there are different types of elements, countless ele- ments. Each [renunciant or brahmin], according to the element he knows, and according to his ability and means in relation to that element, argues exclusively, “This is true; anything else is false.” Therefore, Kosiya, renun- ciants and brahmins do not all have the same teaching, desire, liking, pleasure, and intention. Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. In this world there are different types of elements, countless elements. Each [renunciant or brahmin], according to the element he knows, and according to his ability and means in relation to that element, argues exclu- sively, “This is true; anything else is false.” Therefore, Great Seer, renun- ciants and brahmins do not all have the same teaching, desire, liking, pleasure, and intention. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer- tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. At that time Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, having heard what the Buddha said, was delighted and received it respectfully. He asked further:

Great Seer, are all renunciants and brahmins able to attain the ultimate— the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate completion of the holy life? Hearing this, the World-honored One replied: Kosiya, renunciants and brahmins are not all necessarily able to attain the ultimate—the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate completion of the holy life. Then Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, asked further: Great Seer, for what reason are renunciants and brahmins not all necessarily

able to attain the ultimate—the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate completion of the holy life? On hearing this, the World-honored One replied: Kosiya, if there is a renunciant or brahmin who has not, by the unsurpass- able elimination of craving, rightly and well liberated his mind, then he does not attain the ultimate—the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate completion of the holy life. Kosiya, if there is a renunciant or brahmin who has, by the unsurpass- able elimination of craving, rightly and well liberated the mind, then he attains the ultimate—the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate completion of the holy life. Then, having heard this, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, said: Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. If there is a renunciant or brahmin who has not, by the unsurpassable elimination of craving, rightly and well liberated the mind, then he does not attain the ultimate—the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ulti- mate completion of the holy life. Great Seer, if there is a renunciant or brahmin who has, by the unsur- passable elimination of craving, rightly and well liberated the mind, then he attains the ultimate—the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ulti- mate completion of the holy life. Just so, World-honored One; just so, Well-gone One; just so, Great Seer. I have entirely understood the Dharma as the Buddha has taught it. I have discarded doubt and overcome perplexity, and I am without uncer- tainty because of hearing what the Buddha has said. Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, having heard what the Buddha said, having received it well, and having kept it well [in mind], said: Great Seer, I have had the thorn of doubt for a long time. Today the World- honored One has pulled it out. Why is that? It is because he is a tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened. The World-honored One asked, “Kosiya, do you recall ever having, in the past, asked other renunciants and brahmins about these matters?”

Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, replied:^57

The World-honored One, the Great Seer, would know this himself. Great Seer, [in the past] the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three assembled in the Sudhamma Hall. Each of them, harboring worry and grief, exclaimed again and again, “If we were to encounter a tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awak- ened, we would certainly go and visit him.” However, Great Seer, we were unable to encounter a tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awak- ened. Then we engaged to the full in the five kinds of sensual pleasure. Great Seer, we were negligent. Having been negligent, one _deva_ with great merit then died in that sublime realm. Great Seer, when I saw that that _deva_ with great merit had died in that sublime realm, I became extremely distressed. The hairs of my entire body stood on end [and I thought], “Let me not [so] soon die in this realm!” Great Seer, because of this I was distressed; because of this I was wor- ried. If I saw another renunciant or brahmin staying in a forest place, in a mountain grove, or at the base of a tree, or happily dwelling on a high cliff, or in an isolated quiet place, in seclusion, a place without evil and without people, conducive to seated meditation, then [I knew that] he was enjoying seclusion, sitting in meditation peacefully in seclusion, abiding in happiness. Seeing him, I took him to be a tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened, and I went immediately to pay him a respectful visit. Not recognizing me, he asked me, “Who are you?” Then I answered him, “Great Seer, I am Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s. Great Seer, I am Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s.” He asked me further, “I met Sakka or met members of the Sakka lineage.^58 Why are you called Sakka? Why do you bear the name of the Sakka lineage?” Then I answered him, “Great Seer, if someone comes and asks me about some matter, then I answer him according to my ability, according to my strength ( _sakkā_ ). For this reason, I am called Sakka.”^59 He said, “If we ask Sakka about this matter, Sakka will also answer us about this matter.” Then he asked me about some matters; I did not ask him. [In the end] he took refuge in me; I did not take refuge in him. Great Seer, from those renunciants and brahmins I could not even get a teaching about deportment. How could I get [a teaching on] questions like these?

Then Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, spoke these verses:^60 Sakka approached, and Sakka having approached, Sakka now spoke like this, “Keeping my mind remote from thought, And eliminating doubt and all uncertainty, Long have I traveled the world In search of a tathāgata. “When I saw renunciants and brahmins Sitting in meditation in remote seclusion, I took them to be fully awakened, And went to serve and respect them. “How can I progress upward?” Thus I asked them. Having asked, I [still] could not know The noble path and route. Now the World-honored One has for me [Removed] the doubts I had in my mind: What I was thinking, what I was reflecting on, What my mind was engaged with. Knowing the latent and the manifest in my mind, The Enlightened One has explained them to me. Honor to the Buddha! Honor to the teacher! Honor to the sage who is without attachment! Honor to the one who has cut off all fetters and latent tendencies, Who has delivered himself and who delivers sentient beings, Who has awakened to the highest awakening, The foremost charioteer among charioteers, The one who is still! Honor to his sublime stillness, To the Great Seer who, having delivered himself, delivers [others]! Therefore I pay respect to the one honored by the deva s, And pay homage with my head to the supreme human being,

Who has completely cut out the thorns of craving. I pay homage to the Kinsman of the Sun. At this the World-honored One asked: Kosiya, do you remember having, in the past, attained detachment like this and attained joy like this, that is, joy in the Dharma [which you have] attained in my presence?^61 Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, answered: World-honored One, the Great Seer would certainly know that himself. Great Seer, once long ago the _deva_ s and the _asura_ s were fighting each other. Great Seer, while the _deva_ s and the _asura_ s were fighting each other, I thought, “May the _deva_ s triumph and defeat the _asura_ s! May the food of the _deva_ s and the food of the _asura_ s all be eaten by the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three!” Great Seer, when the _deva_ s and the _asura_ s fought each other, the _deva_ s finally triumphed, defeating the _asura_ s. The food of the _deva_ s and the food of the _asura_ s was all eaten by the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three. Great Seer, at that time I experienced detachment and joy; but it was mixed with the [use of] sword and club, bound up with enmity, with aggression and conflict, with hatred and envy. I was unable to attain pen- etrative knowledge, to attain the path to awakening, to attain nirvana. Great Seer, today I have attained detachment and joy that is not mixed with the [use of] sword and club, not bound up with enmity, with aggression and conflict, or with hatred and envy. I am able to attain penetrative knowl- edge, to attain awakening, and to attain nirvana. The World-honored One asked, “Kosiya, why are you able to attain detach- ment and joy, that is, to attain joy in the Dharma in my presence?” Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, answered: Great Seer, I am having this thought, “When this life of mine ends, may I be reborn among human beings. May the clan [I am born into] be very wealthy and opulent, with immeasurable wealth, with livestock and prop- erty beyond calculation, with a fiefdom well endowed with various feudal manors. That is, may it be a clan of warrior householders, a clan of brahmin householders, or a clan of merchant householders, or any other clan that

is very wealthy and opulent, with immeasurable wealth, with livestock and property beyond calculation, with a fiefdom well endowed with various feudal manors. Having been born into such a clan, may I be endowed with all the fac- ulties, and may I gain faith in the Dharma and discipline taught by the Tathā- gata. Having gained faith, may I shave off my hair and beard, don yellow robes, and out of faith give up the household life and become a homeless one to train in the path. May I train in wisdom. Having trained in wisdom, if I attain wisdom, then may I attain the utmost wisdom, attain the ultimate. As to training in wisdom, if having trained in wisdom I attain wisdom but do not attain final knowledge, then if there exist _deva_ s that are endowed with great merit, with sublime appearance, radiant and bright, with great power, peace, and happiness, and living in a [heavenly] palace for a long time at the highest level, may I be reborn among them!^62 Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, spoke these verses: Abandoning this divine body, May I come down and be born among human beings. Free of ignorance, may I enter a womb According to my intention and pleasure. Having obtained a completely intact body, May I attain the straight right path And practice completely the holy life, Always delighting in begging for almsfood. As to training in wisdom, if, having trained in wisdom, I attain wisdom, then may I attain the final wisdom, and attain the ultimate. [Again] as to training in wisdom, if, having trained in wisdom, I attain wisdom but do not attain the final wisdom, then may I be supreme among sublime _deva_ s, famed among all _deva_ s as one of the Akaniṭṭha _deva_ s, being reborn among them. Great Seer, may I attain nonreturn. Great Seer, at present I have definitely attained stream-entry. The World-honored One asked, “Kosiya, for what reason do you proclaim that you have attained stream-entry, this extremely fine, very high, and very extensive distinction?”^63

Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, answered by reciting verses: [For me] there is no other [object of] veneration In this realm, [there is] only the World-honored One. [I] have attained the highest distinction, Having never before experienced this. Great Seer, as I sit here, In this divine body, I have attained an increase in my life span. It is like this; I have seen it with my own eyes. As he was explaining this phenomenon, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, became remote from the dust of defilements as, [in regard to] all phenomena, the Dharma eye arose [in him]. Eighty-thousand _deva_ s also became remote from the dust of defilements as, [in regard to] all phenomena, the Dharma eye arose [in them]. Thereupon Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, saw the Dharma, attained the Dharma, realized the pure white Dharma, discarded doubt, and overcame perplexity. He would have no other [object of] veneration, would no longer follow others, being without uncertainty. Having attained the fruit of realization and attained unshakability in regard to the World-honored One’s Dharma, he rose from his seat, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, and said:

World-honored One, I now personally take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One receive me as a lay disciple, from now on until life ends. I personally take refuge for my entire life. Thereupon Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, praised the _gandhabba_ Pañca - sikha:

Well done! Well done, Pañcasikha! You have benefited me greatly. Why is that? Because of you, the Buddha emerged from meditative concentra tion. Because you first caused the Buddha to emerge from meditative con centration, we were afterward able to meet the Buddha. Pañcasikha, when I return home from here, I will have Bhaddā Suriya-vacchasā, the daughter of the gandhabba king Timbaru, marry you and become your wife. Also,

I will transfer the territory ruled over by her father, the gandhabba king, to you as the [new] king of the gandhabba s. Then Sakka, the ruler of the deva s, told the deva s of the Thirty-three: All of you, come here! Formerly we paid threefold homage and reverence to the king of deva s Brahmā, who dwells up in the Brahmā world and who now pays homage and reverence exclusively to the World-honored One. Why is that? As to the World-honored One and Brahmā, Brahmā acts as creator; [but] the most to be venerated of all sentient beings,^64 whether born in the present or in the future, is he who completely knows what can be known, and completely sees what can be seen.^65

Thereupon Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, along with the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three and the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha—all of whom had formerly paid threefold homage and reverence to Brahmā who dwells up in the Brahmā world and who [now] pays homage and reverence to the World-honored One—they [all] paid homage with their heads to the Tathāgata, who is free from attachment and fully awakened. Then Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, along with the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three and the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha, again paid homage to the World-honored One. They paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet and, having circumambulated him three times, suddenly vanished from that spot and were no longer to be seen. Then, when the night was over, at dawn, Brahmā, of sublime appearance, radiant and bright, approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, he stepped back, stood to one side, and spoke these verses to the World-honored One:

For the benefit and welfare of the many, Seeing to their profit and benefit, The Noble One, while staying in the Magadha country, Spoke to Vāsava the [ruler] of _deva_ s, Who was asking him questions. When the Great Seer explained this Dharma, Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, became remote from the dust of defilement as, [in regard to] all phenomena, the Dharma eye arose [in him]. Eighty thousand _deva_ s also became remote

from the dust of defilement as, [in regard to] all phenomena, the Dharma eye arose [in them]. At this the World-honored One said to Brahmā: It is like this, as Brahmā has said, it is like this, “For the benefit and welfare of the many, Seeing to their profit and benefit, The Noble One, while staying in the Magadha country, Spoke to Vāsava the [ruler] of _deva_ s, Who was asking him questions.” Brahmā, when I explained the Dharma [to him], Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, became remote from the dust of defilement as, [in regard to] all phenomena, the Dharma eye arose [in him]. Eighty thousand _deva_ s also became remote from the dust of defilement as, [in regard to] all phenomena, the Dharma eye arose [in them]. Thus spoke the Buddha. At that time Sakka, the ruler of the _deva_ s, the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three, the _gandhabba_ Pañcasikha, and the heavenly Great Brahmā, having heard what the Buddha said, were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma134-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[DA14]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MN98]], [[SNP3.9]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN101]], [[MN137]], [[MN18.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA134]]
> ◄  [[ma133-bdk]] 📜  [[ma135-bdk]] ►
