---
sutta_code: "MA146"
sutta_title:
  - "象蹟喻 "
  - "Simile of the Elephant’s Footprint"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA146]]
> ◄  [[ma145-bdk]] 📜  [[ma147-bdk]] ►

### 146. The Discourse on the Simile of the Elephant’s Footprint

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the heterodox practitioner Pilotika had gone out of Sāvatthī at dawn and approached the Buddha.^145 He paid homage by bowing his head, stepped back, and sat to one side. The Buddha expounded the Dharma to him, exhorting and inspiring him, fully delighting him by teaching him the Dharma with countless skillful means. Having exhorted and inspired him, fully delighting him, he remained silent. The heterodox practitioner Pilotika, having been taught the Dharma by the Buddha, having been exhorted, encour- aged, and delighted, rose from his seat, paid homage by bowing his head to the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. At that time the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi, driving a very beautiful white chariot and in the company of five hundred disciples, had gone out of Sāvatthī at dawn and was approaching a forest area with the wish of instructing his dis- ciples in recitation of the sacred texts.^146 The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi saw the het- erodox practitioner Pilotika coming in the distance. He asked him, “Vacchā - yana, having risen so early, where are you coming from?” The heterodox practitioner Pilotika replied, “Brahmin, I come from visiting the World-honored One, having paid my respects and offered my support.”

The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi asked, “Vacchāyana, do you know about the knowl edge and wisdom learned by the renunciant Gotama in empty and quiet places?” The heterodox practitioner Pilotika replied: Brahmin, what kind of person could know about the knowledge and wisdom learned by the World-honored One in empty and quiet places? Brahmin, to know about the knowledge and wisdom learned by the World-honored One in empty and quiet places, one would [have to] be like him. However, brahmin, there are four principles of reason in the sacred texts that we recite.^147 On the basis of these four principles of reason I have firm confidence that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble Sangha of the disciples of the Tathāgata progresses rightly. Brahmin, it is just as a skilled elephant trainer might, while walking in a forest area, see among the trees of the forest a large elephant footprint and, on seeing it, have firm confidence that this footprint belongs to a very big [male] elephant. Brahmin, for me it is the same. There are four prin ciples of reason in the sacred texts that we recite. On the basis of these four principles of reason I have firm confidence that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble Sangha of the Tathāgata’s disciples progresses rightly. What are the four principles of reason? Brahmin, there are learned and wise members of the warrior caste, debaters who have wide learning and determination, who are able to defeat people [in debate], know-it-alls who compose treatises on their various views and promote them among the populace. They think, “We will approach the renunciant Gotama and ask him about such-and-such a matter. If he is able to reply, we will keep on questioning him further. If he is unable to reply, he will be defeated and we will give up and leave.” Hearing that the World-honored One is dwelling in a certain village or town, they approach him. [However,] on seeing the World-honored One, they do not even dare to question him, let alone have the ability to defeat him.^148 In this way, brahmin, using the first principle of reason from the texts that we recite, on the basis of this reason, I have firm confidence that the

World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble Sangha of the Tathāgata’s disciples progresses rightly.^149 In the same way, brahmin, there are learned and wise brahmins... learned and wise householders... learned and wise renunciants, debaters who have wide learning and determination, who are able to defeat ordinary people [in debate], know-it-alls who compose treatises on their various views and promote them among the populace. They think, “We will approach the renunciant Gotama and ask him about such-and-such a matter. If he is able to reply, we will keep on questioning him further. If he is unable to reply, he will be defeated and we will leave.” Hearing that the World-honored One is dwelling in a certain village or town, they approach him. [However,] on seeing the World-honored One, they do not even dare to question him, let alone have the ability to defeat him. In this way, brahmin, using the fourth principle of reason from the texts that we recite, on the basis of this reason, I have firm confidence that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble Sangha of the Tathāgata’s disciples progresses rightly. In this way, brahmin, there are these four principles of reason in the sacred texts that we recite. On the basis of these four principles of reason, I have firm confidence that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble Sangha of the Tathāgata’s disciples progresses rightly.

The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi said:

Vacchāyana, you greatly support the renunciant Gotama. With cause and with reason you are delighted and have respectfully received [his teachings].”

The heterodox practitioner Pilotika replied:

It is like this, brahmin; it is like this. I support that World-honored One to the utmost and praise him to the utmost. The entire world should also support him.

Then the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi, having heard these reasons, descended from his chariot, knelt with his right knee on the ground, extended his hands with joined palms in the direction of Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park, and paid homage three times: “Homage to the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened!” Having done this three times, he returned to mount his very beautiful white chariot and approached Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. Having reached that destination, he descended from the chariot and approached the Buddha on foot. He exchanged polite greetings, stepped back, and sat to one side. The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi told the Buddha the entire conversation he had had with the heterodox practitioner Pilotika. Having heard it, the World-hon- ored One said:

Brahmin, the simile of the elephant’s footprint spoken by the heterodox practitioner Pilotika is not well composed and not complete. I will now tell you the simile of the elephant’s footprint that is well composed and complete. Listen carefully! Brahmin, it is just as a skilled elephant trainer might, while walking in a forest area, see among the trees of the forest a large elephant footprint. On seeing it, he should have confidence that this footprint belongs to a very big [male] elephant. [But,] brahmin, that skilled elephant trainer may lack such confidence, [thinking,] “In this forest there are also female ele phants called kaṇerukā whose bodies are very large. They [too] leave such a footprint.” Then he searches for [more] such footprints and again sees a large ele phant footprint. On seeing it, he should have confidence that this footprint belongs to a very big [male] elephant. [But,] brahmin, that skilled elephant trainer may still lack such confidence, [thinking,] “In this forest there are also female elephants called kāḷārikā whose bodies are very large. They [too] leave such a footprint.” Then he searches for [more] such footprints and again sees a large ele phant footprint. On seeing it, he should have confidence that this footprint belongs to a very big [male] elephant. [But,] brahmin, that skilled elephant trainer may still lack such confidence, [thinking,] “In this forest there are also female elephants called vāmanikā whose bodies are very large. They [too] leave such a footprint.”

Then he searches for [more] such footprints and again sees a large ele- phant footprint. On seeing it, he has firm confidence that this footprint belongs to a very big [male] elephant. Having searched for footprints and seen large elephant footprints, [he thinks,] “Only a big [male] elephant has a footprint so very long and broad, with its entire circumference clearly marked, squarely and deeply impressed in the ground.” Also, he sees the elephant [itself], coming and going, standing still and walking, standing upright and lying down. Having seen that elephant [itself], he thinks, “If there is such a footprint, it must be [of this] big elephant.” In the same way, brahmin, there appears in the world a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, knower of the world, unsurpassable person, leader on the path of Dharma, teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one. In this world with its _deva_ s and _māra_ s, Brahmās, renun- ciants, and brahmins... up to... _deva_ s and human beings he dwells having known by himself, having awakened by himself, having realized by himself. He knows as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” He teaches the Dharma, which is excellent in the beginning, excellent in the middle, and excellent in the end, with its meaning and phrasing, endowed with purity, and he reveals the holy life. Having heard him teach the Dharma, a householder or a householder’s son gains confidence. Having gained confidence in the true Dharma and discipline of the Tathā- gata, he reflects, “The household life is confined, a dusty place; going forth to train in the path is [like] emerging into a vast open space. Now for me at home, fettered with [such] fetters, it is not possible to devote my life completely to the practice of the holy life in purity. Let me forsake my wealth, little or much, forsake my relatives, few or many, shave off beard and hair, don the yellow robe and, out of faith, leave the home life and become homeless to train in the path.” At a later time he forsakes his wealth, little or much, forsakes his rela- tives, few or many, shaves off beard and hair, dons the yellow robe and, out of faith, leaves the home life and becomes homeless to train in the path. Having gone forth to train in the path, having forsaken the characteristics

of family life, he receives the training of monkhood. He observes the training in the precepts, guards [against breaking] the code of rules. He also carefully maintains proper conduct and etiquette, always dreading the slightest fault, upholding the training in the precepts. He abstains from killing, having abandoned killing. He has discarded sword and club, has a sense of shame and scruple, and a mind of loving kindness and compassion, [wishing to] benefit all [beings], even including insects. He purifies his mind with regard to killing living beings. He abstains from taking what is not given, having abandoned taking what is not given. He takes [only] what is given, delighting in taking [only] what is given. He always likes to give generously, rejoicing in non stinginess and not expecting any reward. He purifies his mind with regard to taking what is not given. He abstains from sexual activity, having abandoned sexual activity. He diligently cultivates the practice of celibacy, is energetic in [maintaining this] immaculate conduct, pure, without defilement, free from sensuality, having abandoned sensual passion. He purifies his mind with regard to sexual activity. He abstains from false speech, having abandoned false speech. He speaks the truth, delighting in the truth, unshakably established in the truth, completely trustworthy, not deceiving [anyone in] the world. He purifies his mind with regard to false speech. He abstains from divisive speech, having abandoned divisive speech. He does not engage in speech that is divisive, that would harm others. Hearing something from this person, he does not tell it to that person in order to harm this person; hearing something from that person, he does not tell it to this person in order to harm that person. He wishes to unite those who are divided, delighting in their unity. He does not create factions, does not delight in factions or praise factions. He purifies his mind with regard to divisive speech. He abstains from harsh speech, having abandoned harsh speech. What ever speech there is that is rough and rude in tone, that sounds offensive and grates on the ear, that people neither enjoy nor desire, that causes others suffering and vexation, and that does not lead to calmness—such speech he has abandoned. Whatever speech there is that is pure, peaceful,

and gentle, that is pleasant to the ear and [easily] enters the mind, that is enjoyable and desirable, that gives others happiness, speech endowed with meaning, that does not make others afraid and that leads to calmness in others—such speech he speaks. He purifies his mind with regard to harsh speech. He abstains from frivolous speech, having abandoned frivolous speech. He speaks at the [proper] time, speaks what is true, what is Dharma, what is meaningful, what is peaceful. Delighting in speech that is peaceful in all matters at the proper time and in the proper way, he teaches well and admonishes well. He purifies his mind with regard to frivolous speech. He abstains from earning profits, having abandoned earning profits. He has discarded weights and measures and does not accept goods [on commission], he does not bind people [with debts], does not try to cheat with measures, nor does he deceive others for the sake of some small profit. He purifies his mind with regard to earning profits. He abstains from accepting widows or girls, having abandoned accept- ing widows or girls. He purifies his mind with regard to accepting widows or girls. He abstains from accepting male or female slaves, having abandoned accepting male or female slaves. He purifies his mind with regard to accepting male or female slaves. He abstains from accepting elephants, horses, cattle, or sheep, having abandoned accepting elephants, horses, cattle, or sheep. He purifies his mind with regard to accepting elephants, horses, cattle, or sheep. He abstains from accepting chickens or swine, having abandoned accepting chickens or swine. He purifies his mind with regard to accepting chickens or swine. He abstains from accepting farmlands or marketplaces, having aban- doned accepting farmlands or marketplaces. He purifies his mind with regard to accepting farmlands or marketplaces. He abstains from accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes, having abandoned accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes. He purifies his mind with regard to accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes. He abstains from alcoholic beverages, having abandoned alcoholic beverages. He purifies his mind with regard to alcoholic beverages.^150

He abstains from [reclining on] high and wide beds, having abandoned [reclining on] high and wide beds. He purifies his mind with regard to high and wide beds. He abstains from [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics, having abandoned [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics. He purifies his mind with regard to flower garlands, neck laces, perfumes, and cosmetics. He abstains from singing, dancing, and acting, and from going to see or hear them; he has abandoned singing, dancing, and acting, and [aban doned] going to see or hear them. He purifies his mind with regard to singing, dancing, and acting, and [with regard to] going to see or hear them. He abstains from accepting gold and silver, having abandoned accepting gold and silver. He purifies his mind with regard to accepting gold and silver. He abstains from eating after noon, having abandoned eating after noon. He takes a single meal [per day], not eating at night, training in eating [only] at the [proper] time. He purifies his mind with regard to eating after noon.^151 Having accomplished this noble aggregate of virtue, he further practices supreme contentment, taking robes [just] to cover his body, taking food [just] to sustain his physical body. Wherever he goes, he takes [just] robes and bowl with him, without concerns or longings, just as a wild goose flies through the air with [just] its two wings. Having accomplished this noble aggregate of virtue and this supreme contentment, he further practices guarding the sense faculties. Always mindful of blocking thoughts of desire, with clear understanding, suc cessfully guarding the mind through mindfulness, he constantly arouses right comprehension. On seeing a form with the eye, he does not grasp at its appearance, nor does he savor the form. That is to say, for the sake of restraint, he guards the eye faculty. In order that no covetousness or sorrow, evil and unwholesome states, will arise in the mind, to that end he guards the eye faculty. In the same way, on [hearing a sound] with the ear... [smelling an odor] with the nose... [tasting a flavor] with the tongue... [experiencing a tangible] with the body... cognizing a mental object with the mind, he

does not grasp at its appearance, nor does he savor the mental object. That is to say, for the sake of restraint, he guards the mind faculty. In order that no covetousness or sorrow, evil and unwholesome states, will arise in the mind, to that end he guards the mind faculty. Having accomplished this noble aggregate of virtue, this supreme con- tentment, and this guarding of the sense faculties, he further [practices] right comprehension when going out or coming in, observing and distin- guishing well when bending or stretching [his limbs], when lowering or raising [his head], [all] with orderly manners and appearance; he behaves properly in wearing the outer robe and the other robes, and [in holding] the bowl; when walking, standing, sitting, and reclining, when going to sleep or waking up, when speaking or keeping silent, he always has right comprehension. Having accomplished this noble aggregate of virtue, this supreme con- tentment, this guarding of the sense faculties, and this right comprehension when going out or coming in, he further dwells alone and in seclusion. He stays in a forest area, or at the base of a tree in an empty peaceful place, in a mountain cave, on a heap of straw in an open place, in the midst of a forest, or in a cemetery. Staying in a forest, or having gone to the base of a tree in an empty peaceful place, he spreads out his sitting mat and sits down cross-legged with body erect. With right mental aspiration and undivided mindfulness, he abandons and removes covetousness. With the mind free of agitation on seeing others’ wealth and requisites of life, he does not give rise to covetousness by wishing, “May I get it!” He purifies his mind with regard to covetousness. In the same way he abandons ill will... sloth-and-torpor... restless- ness-and-worry... and he abandons doubt, transcends uncertainty, becomes free from vacillation with regard to wholesome states. He purifies his mind with regard to doubt. Having abandoned these five hindrances, which defile the mind and weaken wisdom, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, he enters and abides in the first absorption, which is accompanied by [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of separation.

Brahmin, this is something the Tathāgata excels in,^152 something prac ticed by the Tathāgata, something the Tathāgata is [well] accustomed to.^153 Yet, [the monk] does not for this reason conclude that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble Sangha of the Tathāgata’s disciples progresses rightly. With the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, he dwells having attained the second absorption, which is without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation and with rapture and happiness born of samādhi. Brahmin, this is something the Tathāgata excels in, something practiced by the Tathāgata, something the Tathāgata is [well] accustomed to. Yet, [the monk] does not for this reason conclude that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble Sangha of the Tathāgata’s disciples progresses rightly. Secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling with equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, experiencing happiness with the body, he dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mind fulness, a happy abode. Brahmin, this is something the Tathāgata excels in, something practiced by the Tathāgata, something the Tathāgata is [well] accustomed to. Yet, [the monk] does not for this reason conclude that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble Sangha of the Tathāgata’s disciples progresses rightly. With the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of joy and displeasure, with neither pain nor pleasure, and with purity of mindfulness and equanimity, he dwells having attained the fourth absorption. Brahmin, this is something the Tathāgata excels in, something practiced by the Tathāgata, something the Tathāgata is [well] accustomed to. Yet, [the monk] does not for that reason conclude that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is

well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble sangha of the Tathāgata’s disciples progresses rightly. With his mind collected and purified in this way, free of defilements, free of troubles, malleable, well steadied, having gained imperturbability, he directs his mind toward knowledge and realization of the destruction of the taints.^154 He knows as it really is: “This is _dukkha._ ” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of _dukkha._ ” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of _dukkha._ ” He knows as it really is: “This is the path to the ces- sation of _dukkha._ ” He knows as it really is: “These are the taints.” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of the taints.” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of the taints.” He knows as it really is: “This is the path to the cessation of the taints.” Knowing like this, seeing like this, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire... from the taint of existence, and his mind is liberated from the taint of ignorance. It being liberated, he knows it is liberated, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been estab- lished, what had to be done has been done. There will not be another expe- riencing of existence.” Brahmin, this is something the Tathāgata excels in, something practiced by the Tathāgata, something the Tathāgata is [well] accustomed to. For this reason [the monk] concludes that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened; that the Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; and that the noble Sangha of the Tathāgata’s dis- ciples progresses rightly. Brahmin, what do you think? Done in this way, is the simile of the ele- phant’s footprint well composed and complete? The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi replied, “Yes indeed, Gotama. Done in this way, the simile of the elephant’s footprint is well composed and complete.” The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi said: World-honored One, I have understood. Well-gone One, I have compre- hended. World-honored One, from now on I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One accept

me as a lay disciple from this day forth until the end of life, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life.^155 Thus said the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi and the heterodox practitioner Pilotika were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma146-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN95]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA146]]
> ◄  [[ma145-bdk]] 📜  [[ma147-bdk]] ►
