---
sutta_code: "MA143"
sutta_title:
  - "傷歌邏 "
  - "With Saṅgārava"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA143]]
> ◄  [[ma142-bdk]] 📜  [[ma144-bdk]] ►

### 143. The Discourse to Saṅgārava

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the young brahmin Saṅgārava, while roaming around in the afternoon, approached the Buddha and exchanged friendly greetings. He stepped back, sat to one side, and said, “Gotama, I would like to ask a question. Will you listen if I venture to express it?” The World-honored One said, “Young brahmin, feel free to ask about what you are in doubt.” Then the young brahmin Saṅgārava asked: Gotama, a brahmin, in accordance with [brahmin] custom, goes begging for wealth [and then] either performs a sacrifice himself or gets [someone else] to perform a sacrifice. Gotama, whether he performs the sacrifice himself or gets [someone else] to perform the sacrifice, in either case he produces countless meritorious effects through the sacrifice. A disciple of the renunciant Gotama, in accordance with his clan’s cus tom, shaves off hair and beard, dons the yellow robes and, out of faith, gives up the household life and becomes homeless to train in the path. He [only] tames himself, attains peace himself, and attains extinction him self. In this way disciples of the renunciant Gotama who follow their clan’s custom produce only a single meritorious effect; they do not produce countless meritorious effects through training in the path.^112 At that time Venerable Ānanda was holding a fan and attending on the Buddha. Then Venerable Ānanda asked, “Young brahmin, of these two ways of practice, which is the superior, the more superb, the more excellent?” The young brahmin Saṅgārava said, “Ānanda, I revere, honor, and venerate the renunciants Gotama and Ānanda.” Venerable Ānanda said again: Young brahmin, I did not ask whom you revere, honor, and venerate. Rather, I asked you: of these two ways of practice, which is the superior, the more superb, the more excellent? Venerable Ānanda asked three times, “Young brahmin, of these two ways of practice, which is the superior, the more superb, the more excellent?”

The young brahmin Saṅgārava also said three times, “Ānanda, I revere, honor, and venerate the renunciants Gotama and Ānanda.” Venerable Ānanda said again: Young brahmin, I did not ask whom you revere, honor, and venerate. Rather, I asked you: of these two ways of practice, which is the superior, the more superb, the more excellent? Then the World-honored One thought, “This young brahmin Saṅgārava has been cornered by Ānanda. Let me rescue him.” Knowing this, the World-honored One said: Young brahmin, in former days, when the king and his courtiers gathered for a great assembly, what matter would they discuss? For what matter would they assemble? The young brahmin Saṅgārava replied: Gotama, in former days, when the king and his courtiers gathered for a great assembly, they would discuss this matter: “What is the cause, what is the reason why the renunciant Gotama formerly laid down few rules, yet many monks attained awakening? What is the cause, what is the reason why the renunciant Gotama now lays down many rules, yet only a few monks attain awakening?”^113 Gotama, in former days, when the king and his courtiers gathered for a great assembly, they would discuss this matter. Because of this matter they would assemble. Then the World-honored One said: Young brahmin, I will now ask you. Answer in accordance with your understanding. What do you think? Suppose that a renunciant or brahmin themselves walk a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, they eradicate all taints and attain the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, and dwell knowing by themselves, awakening by themselves, realizing by themselves: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence,” knowing it as it really is. They tell others, “I myself undertook a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, I eradicated all taints and

attained the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, and I dwell having known by myself, having awakened by myself, having realized by myself: ‘Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence,’ knowing it as it really is. “Come, all of you, and walk by yourselves a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, you will eradicate all taints and attain the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wis dom, and will dwell knowing by yourselves, awakening by yourselves, realizing by yourselves: ‘Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence,’ knowing it as it really is.” They themselves also walk a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, they eradicate all taints and attain the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, and they dwell having known by themselves, having awakened by themselves, having realized by themselves, “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence,” knowing it as it really is. They tell others, and those others tell others, and so on in turn to count less hundreds and thousands [of others]. What do you think, young brah min? My disciples who follow their clan’s custom by shaving off hair and beard, donning the yellow robes and, out of faith, give up the household life and become homeless to train in the path—do they produce only a single meritorious effect? Do they not produce countless meritorious effects by training in the path? The young brahmin Saṅgārava replied: Gotama, as I understand the meaning of what the renunciant Gotama has said, the disciples of the renunciant Gotama, who follow their clan’s custom by shaving off hair and beard, donning the yellow robes and, out of faith, give up the household life and become homeless to train in the path—they produce countless meritorious effects. They do not produce only a single meritorious effect by training in the path.

The World-honored One further said to Saṅgārava:

There are three types of miracle: the miracle of supernormal powers, the miracle of divining the thoughts [of others], and the miracle of instruction. Young brahmin, what is the miracle of supernormal powers? Here a renunciant or brahmin has great supernormal powers, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great divine might. His mind has mastery of supernormal powers and engages in the virtues of immeasurable supernormal powers, namely, being one, he becomes many; being many, he becomes one [again]. Being one, he remains one, possessing knowledge and possessing vision. He passes unhindered through stone walls as if passing through space. He dives into the earth as if it were water; he walks on water [without sinking] as if it were earth. Seated cross-legged, he ascends into space like a bird. With his hand he touches and strokes the sun and the moon, which are of such great supernormal power, of such great and mighty virtue, of such great merit, of such great divine might. With his body he reaches the Brahmā world. Young brahmin, this is called the miracle of supernormal powers. Young brahmin, what is the miracle of divining the thoughts [of others]? Here a renunciant or brahmin uses another person’s outward appearance as a basis for divining that other person’s mind to be like this [or like that]. If [he divines] that mind to be like this [or like that], then it really is like this [or like that]. He makes countless divinations, not just a few divina- tions, and all of them are correct; none is false. If he does not divine another person’s mind on the basis of that other person’s outward appearance, then he instead divines that person’s mind to be a mind like this [or like that] by hearing the sound of _deva_ s or the sound of [other] non-human beings. If [he divines] it to be a mind like this [or like that], then it really is a mind like this [or like that]. He makes countless divinations, not just a few divinations, and all of them are correct; none is false. If he does not divine another person’s mind on the basis of that other person’s outward appearance, and also not by hearing the sound of _deva_ s or the sound of [other] non-human beings, then he instead divines that person’s mind to be like this [or like that] on the basis of that other person’s

thoughts, his intentions, and what he says. On hearing [that person’s] voice, [he divines] his mind to be like this [or like that]. If he divines it to be a mind like this [or like that], then it really is a mind like this [or like that]. He makes countless divinations, not just a few divinations, and all of them are correct; none is false. If he does not divine another person’s mind on the basis of that other person’s outward appearance, and also not by hearing the sound of deva s or the sound of [other] nonhuman beings, and also not on the basis of that other person’s thoughts, his intentions, and what he says, nor on hearing his voice, then he instead divines that other person’s mind by seeing them enter the samādhi that is without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation. Having seen this, he thinks, “In this state the venerable one is not thinking and not intending, [yet] his mind has such-and-such inclinations. [When] that venerable one emerges from this samādhi, he will think like this [and like that].” On emerging from this samādhi that one does [indeed] think like this and like that. [A renunciant or brahmin] may also divine the past, the future, and the present: what was done long ago and said long ago. He may also divine [the mind of someone who is] in a quiet place, dwelling in a quiet place, even divining his mind states and his mind objects. Young brahmin, this is called the miracle of divining the thoughts [of others]. Young brahmin, what is the miracle of instruction? Here a renunciant or brahmin themselves walk a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, they eradicate all taints and attain the taintless lib eration of the mind and liberation by wisdom, and dwell knowing by them selves, awakening by themselves, realizing by themselves: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence,” knowing it as it really is. They tell others, “I myself walked a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, I eradicated all taints and attained the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, and I dwell having known by myself, having awakened by myself, having realized by myself, ‘Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence,’ knowing it as it really is.

“Come, all of you, and also walk such a path yourselves, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, you will eradicate all taints and attain the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, and dwell knowing by yourselves, awakening by yourselves, realizing by yourselves: ‘Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence,’ knowing it as it really is.” They themselves also walk such a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, they eradicate all taints and attain the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, and dwell having known by themselves, having awakened by themselves, having realized by themselves: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence,” knowing it as it really is. They tell others, and those others tell others, and so on in turn to count- less hundreds and thousands [of others]. Young brahmin, this is what is called the miracle of instruction.^114 Of these three miracles, which miracle is the best, the most superb, the most excellent?

The young brahmin Saṅgārava replied:

Gotama, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin has great supernormal powers, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great divine might. His mind has mastery of supernormal powers... up to... with his body he reaches the Brahmā world. Gotama, this is done for himself and is possessed by himself; he himself receives the fruit of it. Gotama, this miracle is [nevertheless] a great method among these miracles.^115 Gotama, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin divines the minds of others based on their outward appearance... up to... he divines their mind states and their mind objects. Gotama, this too is done for himself and is possessed by himself; he himself receives the fruit of it. Gotama, this miracle is [nev- ertheless] a great method among these miracles. Gotama, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin himself walks such a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, he erad- icates all taints and attains the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, and dwells having known by himself, having awakened by

himself, having realized by himself: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence,” knowing it as it really is. He tells others, those others tell others, and so on in turn to countless hundreds and thousands [of others]. Gotama, among these three miracles, this miracle is the best, the most superb, the most excellent. The World-honored One asked Saṅgārava, “Of these three miracles, for which miracle would your praise [someone]?” The young brahmin Saṅgārava replied: Gotama, I praise the renunciant Gotama for [each of] these three miracles. Why is that? The renunciant Gotama has great supernormal powers, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great divine might. His mind has mastery of supernormal powers... up to... with his body he reaches the Brahmā world. The renunciant Gotama divines the minds of others on the basis of their outward appearance... up to... he divines their mind states and their mind objects. The renunciant Gotama [manifests] the miracle of [teaching] a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, one eradicates all taints and attains the taintless liberation of the mind and lib- eration by wisdom, and dwells knowing by oneself, awakening by oneself, realizing by oneself: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence,” knowing it as it really is. The renunciant Gotama tells others, those others tell others, and so on in turn to countless hundreds and thou- sands [of others]. Gotama, for this reason, in relation to these three miracles, I praise the renunciant Gotama. Then the World-honored One said: Young brahmin, you have penetrated this discussion well.^116 Why is that? I have great supernormal powers, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great divine might. My mind has mastery of supernormal powers... up to... with my body I reach the Brahmā world. Young brahmin, I divine the minds of others on the basis of their outward appearance... up to... I divine their mind states and their mind objects.

Young brahmin, I have myself walked a path, a track such that, having walked this path, having walked this track, I eradicated all taints and attained the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, and I dwell having known by myself, having awakened by myself, having realized by myself: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence,” knowing it as it really is. I tell others, those others tell others, and so on in turn to countless hun- dreds and thousands [of others]. Young brahmin, for this reason you have penetrated this discussion well. You should receive it well like this and keep it well in mind. Why is that? The meaning of what has been said is just like this. Then the young brahmin Saṅgārava said: World-honored One, I have understood. Well-gone One, I have compre- hended. World-honored One, from now on I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth until life ends, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life. Thus said the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the young brahmin Saṅgārava, Venerable Ānanda, and the [other] monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma143-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.75]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA143]]
> ◄  [[ma142-bdk]] 📜  [[ma144-bdk]] ►
