---
sutta_code: "MA147"
sutta_title:
  - "聞德 "
  - "Virtues of Learning"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA147]]
> ◄  [[ma146-bdk]] 📜  [[ma148-bdk]] ►

### 147. The Discourse on the Virtues of Learning

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi, while roaming around in the afternoon, approached the Buddha. He exchanged friendly greetings, stepped back, sat to one side, and said, “Gotama, I would like to ask a question. Will you listen if I venture to express it?” The World-honored One said, “Brahmin, feel free to ask.” The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi then asked: Among the disciples of the renunciant Gotama there are those who live at home and those who have gone forth to train in the path. For what pur pose do they recite and practice what they have widely heard [of the Dharma]? The World-honored One replied: Brahmin, my disciples, who live at home or who have gone forth to train in the path, recite and practice what they have widely heard because they wish to tame themselves, they wish to calm themselves, they seek final extinction for themselves. Brahmin, for these reasons my disciples, who live at home or who have gone forth to train in the path, recite and practice what they have widely heard. The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi asked further, “Gotama, is it a distinction to recite and practice what one has widely heard? Is it a virtue to recite and practice what one has widely heard?” The World-honored One replied, “Brahmin, it is a distinction to recite and practice what one has widely heard. It is a virtue to recite and practice what one has widely heard.”

The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi asked again, “Gotama, what is the distinction, what is the virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard?” The World-honored One replied: Brahmin, a learned noble disciple works all day wishing to gain profit; [then] the work he has done comes to ruin and is unsuccessful. Although his work has come to ruin and is unsuccessful, he is not worried, vexed, and aggrieved; he does not beat his breast in distress; he does not become deranged. Brahmin, that a learned noble disciple, who works all day wishing to gain profit and whose work comes to ruin and is unsuccessful, is not wor- ried, vexed, and aggrieved when his work comes to ruin and is unsuc- cessful, that he does not beat his breast in distress and does not become deranged—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, the possessions for which a learned noble disciple has affection become otherwise, cease to exist, fall apart. Despite becoming separated from them, being no more associated with them, having to part with them, he is not worried, vexed, and aggrieved; he does not beat his breast in distress; he does not become deranged. Brahmin, that a learned noble disciple is not worried, vexed, and aggrieved when possessions for which he has affection become otherwise, cease to exist, and fall apart, that despite becoming separated from them and being no more associated with them, he does not beat his breast in distress and does not become deranged—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, a learned noble disciple understands that all the wealth he owns is impermanent and he thinks of going forth to train in the path. Brahmin, that a learned noble disciple understands that all the wealth he owns is impermanent and thinks of going forth to train in the path—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, a learned noble disciple, having understood that all the wealth he owns is impermanent, shaves off beard and hair, dons the yellow robe and, out of faith, leaves the home life and becomes homeless to train in the path. Brahmin, that a learned noble disciple who has understood that

all the wealth he owns is impermanent, shaves off beard and hair, dons the yellow robe and, out of faith, leaves the home life, and becomes home less to train in the path—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, a learned noble disciple is able to bear hunger and thirst, cold and heat, mosquitos and gadflies, flies and fleas, and oppression by wind or sun. He is also able to bear evil speech or being beaten with sticks, or to encounter with his body any kind of disease, so painful that one would wish to end one’s life, or whatever [else] is undesirable—all of this he is able to endure. Brahmin, that a learned noble disciple is able to bear hunger and thirst, cold and heat, mosquitos and gadflies, flies and fleas, and oppression by wind or sun; that he is also able to bear evil speech, or being beaten with sticks, or encountering with his body any kind of disease, so painful that one would wish to end one’s life; that he is able to endure whatever is undesirable—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and prac ticing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, a learned noble disciple tolerates dislike; if dislike arises, his mind never clings to it. Brahmin, that a learned noble disciple tolerates dislike; that if dislike arises, his mind never clings to it—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, a learned noble disciple tolerates fear; if fear arises, his mind never clings to it. Brahmin, that a learned noble disciple tolerates fear; that if fear arises, his mind never clings to it—this, brahmin, is a dis tinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, if in a learned noble disciple there arise the three [kinds of] evil and unwholesome thoughts: thoughts of desire, thoughts of anger, and thoughts of harming; then, having these three [kinds of] evil and unwholesome thoughts, his mind never clings to them. Brahmin, that if in a learned noble disciple there arise the three [kinds of] unwholesome thoughts: thoughts of desire, thoughts of anger, and thoughts of harming; that having these three [kinds of] evil and unwholesome thoughts, his mind never clings to them—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard.

Again, brahmin, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states... up to... a learned noble disciple dwells having attained the fourth absorption. Brahmin, that secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states... up to... a learned noble disciple dwells having attained the fourth absorption—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, through the elimination of three fetters a learned noble disciple attains stream-entry. He will not fall into evil conditions and is assured of progress toward full awakening within at most seven existences. Having gone through [at most] seven existences in heavenly or human realms, he will attain the ending of _dukkha._ Brahmin, that through the elimination of three fetters a learned noble disciple attains stream-entry, will not fall into evil conditions, and is assured of progress toward full awakening within at most seven existences, that having gone through [at most] seven existences in the heavenly or human realms, he will attain the ending of _dukkha—_ this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, having eliminated three fetters, a learned noble disciple reduces sensual passion, anger, and ignorance and attains once-returning. Having passed through one existence in a heavenly or human realm, he will attain the ending of _dukkha._ Brahmin, that having eliminated three fetters a learned noble disciple reduces sensual desire, anger, and ignorance and attains once-returning, that having passed through one existence in a heavenly or human realm, he will attain the ending of _dukkha—_ this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, having eliminated the five lower fetters, a learned noble disciple, who on having been reborn in between will attain final nirvana there, has attained the condition of nonreturning, not coming back to this world. Brahmin, that having eliminated the five lower fetters a learned noble disciple, who on having been reborn in between will attain final nirvana there, has attained the condition of nonreturning, not coming back to this world—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, a learned noble disciple attains the peaceful liberations; transcending form, he attains the formless; and he dwells having directly

realized collected states such that, through wisdom and insight, he understands the taints and eradicates them. Brahmin, that a learned noble disciple attains the peaceful liberations, that transcending form, he attains the formless, and that he dwells having directly realized collected states such that, through wisdom and insight, he understands the taints and eradicates them—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. Again, brahmin, a learned noble disciple acquires the supernormal powers: the divine ear, the knowledge of other minds, the knowledge of former lives, and the knowledge of the birth and death [of beings]; and through having eradicated all the taints, he attains the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, knowing and realizing it by himself here and now; and he dwells having personally realized, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Brahmin, that a learned noble disciple acquires the supernormal powers: the divine ear, the knowledge of other minds, the knowledge of former lives, and the knowledge of the birth and death [of beings]; and that through having eradicated all the taints, he attains the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, knowing and realizing it by himself here and now, and that he dwells having personally realized, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence”—this, brahmin, is a distinction, a virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard. The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi asked the Blessed One further: [Regarding] these distinctions and virtues in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard, is there another distinction and virtue in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard, [a distinction and virtue] that is superior, more sublime, more excellent? The World-honored One replied: Brahmin, [regarding] these distinctions and virtues in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard, there is no other distinction and no other virtue

in reciting and practicing what one has widely heard, [no distinction or virtue] that is superior, more sublime, more excellent. The brahmin Jāṇussoṇi said: World-honored One, I have understood. Well-gone One, I have compre- hended. World-honored One, I now personally go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth until the end of life, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life. Thus said the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma147-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA147]]
> ◄  [[ma146-bdk]] 📜  [[ma148-bdk]] ►
