---
sutta_code: "MA144"
sutta_title:
  - "算數目揵連 "
  - "With Moggallāna the Accountant"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA144]]
> ◄  [[ma143-bdk]] 📜  [[ma145-bdk]] ►

### 144. The Discourse to Gaṇaka Moggallāna

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in the Eastern Park, the Hall of Migāra’s Mother. At that time the brahmin Gaṇaka Moggallāna, while roaming around in the afternoon, approached the Buddha and exchanged friendly greetings. He stepped back, sat to one side, and said, “Gotama, I would like to ask a question. Will you listen if I venture to express it?” The World-honored One said, “Moggallāna, feel free to ask. Let no doubt trouble you.” Then Gaṇaka Moggallāna asked:

Gotama, this Hall of Migāra’s Mother was constructed gradually, by stages, until it reached completion. Gotama, within this Hall of Migāra’s Mother one ascends by the ladders first to the first level, and after that to the second, third, and fourth levels. Gotama, in this way one ascends gradually within the Hall of Migāra’s Mother. Gotama, for elephant trainers there is a gradual training until completion, namely by means of the hook. Gotama, for horse trainers there is also a gradual training until completion, namely by means of the halter.^118 Gotama, for warriors there is also a gradual training until completion, namely by means of grasping bow and arrow. Gotama, for brahmins there is also a gradual training until completion, namely by means of learning the texts. Gotama, in our learning of accountancy, in order to make a living by accounting, there is also a gradual training until completion. If we have an apprentice, whether male or female, we first teach him or her one one, two twos, three threes, [and so on to the] tens, hundreds, thousands, and ten thousands, gradually going upward. Gotama, thus in our learning of accountancy, in order to make a living by accounting, there is a gradual training until completion. Renunciant Gotama, in this Dharma and disci pline [of yours], is there a gradual training until completion? The Word-honored One said: Moggallāna, rightly speaking, there is a gradual training until completion. Moggallāna, this is rightly said of my Dharma and discipline. Why is that? Moggallāna, in my Dharma and discipline there is a gradual training until completion. Moggallāna, when a young monk first comes to train in the path, one who is just entering this Dharma and discipline, the Tathāgata first instructs him, “Come, monk, with your body guard the purity of your livelihood, with your speech... with your mind guard the purity of your liveli hood.”^119 Moggallāna, suppose a monk guards the purity of his livelihood with the body, guards the purity of his livelihood with speech... and mind. Then the Tathāgata instructs him further, “Come, monk, contemplate the body as a body internally... up to... contemplate feelings... states of mind... dharmas as dharmas.”

Moggallāna, suppose a monk contemplates the body as a body inter- nally... up to... contemplates feelings... states of mind... dharmas as dharmas. Then the Tathāgata instructs him further, “Come, monk, contemplate the body as a body internally and do not think thoughts related to sen- suality... up to... contemplate feelings... states of mind... dharmas as dharmas and do not think thoughts that are not in accordance with the Dharma.” Moggallāna, suppose a monk contemplates the body as a body internally and does not think thoughts related to sensuality... up to... contemplates feelings... states of mind... dharmas as dharmas and does not think thoughts that are not in accordance with the Dharma. Then the Tathāgata instructs him further, “Come, monk, guard the sense faculties, always being mindful of stopping thoughts of sensuality with clear understanding. Successfully guard the mind through mindfulness, constantly arousing right comprehension. On seeing a form with the eye, do not cling to its appearance; do not savor the form. That is to say, for the sake of restraint, guard the eye faculty so that no covetousness or sorrow, evil and unwholesome states, arise in the mind. For progress in that, guard the eye faculty. In the same way, [on hearing a sound] with the ear... [smelling an odor] with the nose... [tasting a flavor] with the tongue... [experiencing a tangible] with the body... coming to know a mental object with the mind, do not cling to its appearance, do not savor the mental object. That is to say, for the sake of restraint, guard the mind faculty so that no covetousness or sorrow, evil and unwholesome states, arise in the mind. For progress in that, guard the mind faculty.”^120 Moggallāna, suppose a monk guards the sense faculties and is always mindful of stopping thoughts of sensuality with clear understanding; he successfully guards the mind through mindfulness, constantly arousing right comprehension; on seeing a form with the eye, he does not cling to its appearance, does not savor the form; that is to say, for the sake of restraint, he guards the eye faculty so that no covetousness or sorrow, evil and unwholesome states, arise in the mind; for progress in that, he guards the eye faculty; in the same way, on [hearing a sound] with the ear... [smelling an odor] with the nose... [tasting a flavor] with the tongue...

[experiencing a tangible] with the body... coming to know a mental object with the mind, he does not cling to its appearance, does not savor the mental object; that is to say, for the sake of restraint, he guards the mind faculty so that no covetousness or sorrow, evil and unwholesome states, arise in the mind; in order to progress in that, he guards the mind faculty. Then the Tathāgata instructs him further, “Come, monk, have right comprehension when going out or coming in, contemplate and distinguish well when bending or stretching [the limbs], when lowering or raising [the head]; with orderly manners and appearance, carry properly the outer robe, the other robes, and the bowl; when walking, standing, sitting, and reclining, when going to sleep or waking up, when speaking or keeping silent, always have right comprehension.”^121 Moggallāna, suppose a monk has right comprehension when going out or coming in, contemplates and distinguishes well when bending or stretch ing [the limbs], when lowering or raising [the head]; with orderly manners and appearance, he carries properly the outer robe, the other robes, and the bowl; when walking, standing, sitting, and reclining, when going to sleep or waking up, when speaking or keeping silent, he always has right comprehension. Then the Tathāgata instructs him further, “Come, monk, dwell alone in seclusion. Stay in a forest area or go to the base of a tree in an empty peaceful place, to a mountain cave, to a heap of straw in an open place, or go into a forest, or stay in a cemetery. Staying in a forest or having gone to the base of a tree in an empty peaceful place, you spread out the sitting mat and sit down cross-legged with body erect, with right mental aspiration and undivided mindfulness. “Abandon and remove covetousness. With a mind free from agitation, on seeing others’ wealth and requisites of life, do not give rise to cov etousness, wishing, ‘May I get it!’ Purify your mind of covetousness. In the same way abandon ill will... sloth-and-torpor... restlessness-and worry... abandon doubt, transcend uncertainty, become free from vac illation in regard to wholesome states. Purify your mind of doubt. “Abandon these five hindrances, which defile the mind and weaken wisdom. Secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwhole some states... up to... dwell having attained the fourth absorption.”

Moggallāna, suppose that a monk, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states... up to... dwells having attained the fourth absorption. Moggallāna, [in this way] the Tathāgata is of much benefit to new monks, by instructing and teaching them. Moggallāna, if there are monks who are elders, highly regarded, sea- soned practitioners of the holy life, then the Tathāgata teaches them further, namely regarding final knowledge, the complete and total eradication of the taints. Gaṇaka Moggallāna asked again: Renunciant Gotama, do all disciples, on being instructed like this and taught like this, completely attain final knowledge, certainly [attaining] nirvana? The World-honored One replied, “Moggallāna, not all attain it. Some attain it, some do not attain it.” Gaṇaka Moggallāna asked again: Gotama, what is the cause here, what is the reason why, [although] there is nirvana, and there is the path to nirvana, and the renunciant Gotama is at present the guiding teacher, yet some monks, being instructed like this, taught like this, attain final knowledge, nirvana, and some do not attain it? The World-honored One replied: Moggallāna, I will ask you in return. Answer according to your under- standing. Moggallāna, what do you think? Do you know the location of the city of Rājagaha and are you well acquainted with the road to it? Gaṇaka Moggallāna replied, “Indeed, I know the location of the city of Rājagaha and I am well acquainted with the road to it.” The World-honored One asked: Moggallāna, suppose that someone comes by wishing to visit the king, to reach the city of Rājagaha. That person asks you, “I wish to visit the king and reach Rājagaha. Gaṇaka Moggallāna, do you know the location of the city of Rājagaha? Are you well acquainted with the road to it? Can you show it to me and explain it?”

You tell that person, “From here go to the east until you reach a certain village; going on from that village, you will reach a certain town; contin uing in this way you will reach the city of Rājagaha. On the outskirts of the city of Rājagaha there are beautiful parks on level ground, with watch towers and bathing places, with various kinds of flowering trees, located between flowing rivers and clear springs. All of these you will see and recognize.” Having heard your words and received your instructions, [this person] heads east from here and soon, before long, leaves the correct road and follows a wrong road heading in the opposite direction. The beautiful parks on level ground on the outskirts of the city of Rājagaha, with watch towers and bathing places, with various kinds of flowering trees, located between flowing rivers and clear springs—all of these [the person] does not see, does not recognize. Someone else comes by wishing to visit the king, to reach the city of Rājagaha, and that person asks you, “I wish to visit the king and reach Rājagaha. Gaṇaka Moggallāna, do you know the location of the city of Rājagaha? Are you well acquainted with the road to it? Can you show it to me and explain it?” You tell that person, “From here go to the east until you reach a certain village; going on from that village, you will reach a certain town; contin uing in this way you will reach the city of Rājagaha. On the outskirts of the city of Rājagaha there are beautiful parks on level ground, with watch towers and bathing places, with various kinds of flowering trees, located between flowing rivers and clear springs. All of these you will see and recognize.” Having heard your words and received your instructions, [the person] heads east from here until they reach that village, from that village they go until they reach the town, and so on in this way until they reach the city of Rājagaha. The beautiful parks on level ground on the outskirts of the city of Rājagaha, with watchtowers and bathing places, with various kinds of flowering trees, located between flowing rivers and clear springs— all of these they see and recognize. Moggallāna, what is the cause here, what is the reason why, [given that] there is that city of Rājagaha, there is the road to the city of Rājagaha,

and you are at present the guiding teacher, yet the first person following the instructions they received from you, left the correct road before long and followed a wrong road in the opposite direction, and did not at all get to see and recognize the beautiful parks on level ground on the outskirts of the city of Rājagaha, with watchtowers and bathing places, with various kinds of flowering trees, located between flowing rivers and clear springs? [And what is the cause here, what is the reason why] the second person, following the instructions they received from you, following the correct level road and so on, was able to reach the city of Rājagaha, and got to see and recognize the beautiful parks on level ground on the outskirts of the city of Rājagaha, with watchtowers and bathing places, with various kinds of flowering trees, located between flowing rivers and clear springs?

Gaṇaka Moggallāna replied:

Gotama, it has nothing at all to do with me. There is the city of Rājagaha, there is the road to the city of Rājagaha, and I am at present the guiding teacher. That first person did not follow my instructions. Before long they left the correct road and followed a wrong road in the opposite direction; [consequently] they did not at all get to see and recognize the beautiful parks on level ground on the outskirts of the city of Rājagaha, with watch- towers and bathing places, with various kinds of flowering trees, located between flowing rivers and clear springs.^122 That second person followed the instructions they received from me, following the right level road and so on they were able to reach the city of Rājagaha, and they got to see and recognize all the beautiful parks on level ground on the outskirts of the city of Rājagaha, with watchtowers and bathing places, with various kinds of flowering trees, located between flowing rivers and clear springs.

The World-honored One said:

In the same way, Moggallāna, it also has nothing to do with me. There is nirvana, there is the path to nirvana, I am the guiding teacher, yet some monks, being instructed like this, taught like this, attain final knowledge, nirvana, and some do not attain it. Moggallāna, each monk follows the practice by themselves. At that time the World-honored One has merely

declared that practice, namely [what leads to] complete eradication of the taints. Gaṇaka Moggallāna said: Gotama, I have understood. Gotama, I have comprehended. Gotama, it is just as if there were a grove of _sāla_ trees growing on good ground and in it there was a guardian of the _sāla_ tree grove, who is intelligent, healthy, and not lazy. At appropriate times [the guardian] digs around the roots of the _sāla_ trees with a hoe, making the ground level. [The guardian] puts down fertilizer and waters the trees, never missing the time for it. If bad weeds grow beside the trees, [the guardian] pulls them all out and discards them. If there are [trees] that are growing sideways or crookedly, ones that are not growing straight, [the guardian] prunes and trains them all. If there are straight and very beautiful trees among them, [the guardian] nourishes and protects them, according to the season, hoeing, fertilizing, and watering them, without missing the time for it. In this way the _sāla_ tree grove on good ground flourishes and becomes beautiful.^123 Gotama, in the same way there are persons who are hypocritical and deceitful, completely lacking in generosity, without faith, lazy, without mindfulness, without samādhi, stupid, crazy-minded, with their fac- ulties in disorder, lax in adhering to the precepts, who do not extensively cultivate [the way of] the renunciant. Gotama, with such persons it is not possible to work. Why is that? Gotama, such persons defile the holy life. Gotama, again there are persons who are not hypocritical and not deceit- ful, who have generosity and faith, who are energetic and not lazy, who have mindfulness, have samādhi, and have wisdom, who respect the precepts to the utmost and extensively cultivate [the way of] the renunciant. Gotama, with such persons it is possible to work. Why is that? Gotama, such persons maintain the purity of the holy life. Gotama, it is just as aloe root is foremost among fragrant roots. Why is that? Gotama, it is because aloe root is supreme among fragrant roots. Gotama, it is just as red sandalwood is foremost among fragrant _sāla_ trees. Why is that? Gotama, it is because red sandalwood is supreme among fragrant _sāla_ trees.

Gotama, it is just as the blue lotus is foremost among all flowers that grow in water. Why is that? Gotama, it is because the blue lotus is supreme among all flowers that grow in water. Gotama, it is just as jasmine is foremost among all flowers that grow on land. Why is that? Gotama, it is because jasmine is supreme among all flowers that grow on land.^124 Gotama, it is just as the renunciant Gotama is foremost among teachers in the world. Why is that? It is because the renunciant Gotama is able to outdo in debate all practitioners of heterodox teachings. World-honored One, from now on I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth until life ends as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life. Thus said the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Gaṇaka Mog- gallāna and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma144-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN8.9]], [[AN9.64]], [[AN9.65]], [[SN47.4]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA144]]
> ◄  [[ma143-bdk]] 📜  [[ma145-bdk]] ►
