---
sutta_code: "MA142"
sutta_title:
  - "雨勢 "
  - "To Vassakāra"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA142]]
> ◄  [[ma141-bdk]] 📜  [[ma143-bdk]] ►

### 142. The Discourse Wassakāra

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, on Mount Vulture Peak. At that time King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha harbored hatred for Vajji. He repeatedly said to his retainers:

The people of the Vajji country have great might, great virtue, great merit, great power; [yet] I will exterminate the Vajji clan, destroy Vajji, and cause the Vajji people to meet with immeasurable misfortune. Then King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha heard that the World-hon- ored One was staying at Rājagaha, on Mount Vulture Peak. He said to his chief minister Vassakāra:

I hear that the renunciant Gotama is staying at Rājagaha, on Mount Vulture Peak. Vassakāra, approach the renunciant Gotama and in my name politely inquire whether the noble one is at ease and without illness in the body and whether his strength is as usual. Say this, “Gotama, King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha inquires whether the noble one is at ease and without illness in the body and whether his strength is as usual. “Gotama, King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha harbors hatred for Vajji. He repeatedly says to his retainers, ‘The people of the Vajji country have great might, great virtue, great merit, great power; [yet] I will exterminate the Vajji clan, destroy Vajji, and cause the Vajji people to meet with immeas- urable misfortune.’ What does the renunciant Gotama say about this?” Vassakāra, receive and remember well what the renunciant Gotama says! Why is that? Such a person never speaks falsehood. Having received these instructions from the king, the chief minister Vas- sakāra mounted a most beautiful chariot, went out of the town of Rājagaha

in the company of five hundred chariots, and headed for Mount Vulture Peak. Having gone up to Mount Vulture Peak, he descended from the chariot and approached the Buddha on foot. He exchanged polite greetings with the World-honored One, stepped back, sat to one side, and said: Gotama, King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha inquires whether the noble one is at ease and without illness in the body and whether your strength is as usual. Gotama, King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha harbors hatred for Vajji. He repeatedly says to his retainers, “The people of the Vajji country have great might, great virtue, great merit, great power; [yet] I will exter minate the Vajji clan, destroy Vajji, cause the Vajji people to meet with immeasurable misfortune.” What does the renunciant Gotama say about this? Having heard this, the World-honored One said:^99 Vassakāra, formerly I was dwelling in the Vajji country where there is a shrine called Sārandada. Vassakāra, at that time I taught the people of the Vajji country seven principles for non-decline, and the people of the Vajji country were able to accept and implement those seven principles for non-decline. Vassakāra, if the people of the Vajji country implement the seven principles for non-decline and do not violate them, then Vajji will certainly excel; it will not decline. The chief minister Vassakāra said to the World-honored One: The renunciant Gotama has spoken of this matter in brief, without expound ing the details. We are unable to understand its meaning. May the renun ciant Gotama expound the details, so that we can come to understand the meaning. The World-honored One said, “Vassakāra, listen closely and pay proper attention, I will explain the meaning in detail to you.” The chief minister Vassakāra listened to receive the instruction. At that time, Venerable Ānanda was holding a fan and attending on the Buddha. The World-honored One turned and asked him, “Ānanda, have you heard whether the Vajjis conduct frequent assemblies, often meeting together?”

Venerable Ānanda replied, “World-honored One, I have heard that the Vajjis conduct frequent assemblies, often meeting together.” The World-honored One said to the chief minister Vassakāra, “If the Vajjis conduct frequent assemblies, often meeting together, then Vajji will certainly excel; it will not decline.” The World-honored One further asked Venerable Ānanda: Have you heard whether the Vajjis conduct their assemblies collaboratively, deal with the affairs of Vajji collaboratively, and conclude [the assemblies] collaboratively? Venerable Ānanda replied: World-honored One, I have heard that the Vajjis conduct their assemblies collaboratively, deal with the affairs of Vajji collaboratively, and conclude [the assemblies] collaboratively. The World-honored One again said to the chief minister Vassakāra: If the Vajjis conduct their assemblies collaboratively, deal with the affairs of Vajji collaboratively, and conclude [the assemblies] collaboratively, then Vajji will certainly excel; it will not decline. The World-honored One further asked Venerable Ānanda: Have you heard whether the Vajjis do not decree what has never previously been decreed, do not alter what has already been decreed, and properly respect and follow the principles of the ancient Vajjis? Venerable Ānanda replied: World-honored One, I have heard that the Vajjis do not decree what has never previously been decreed, do not alter what has already been decreed, and properly respect and follow the principles of the ancient Vajjis. The World-honored One again said to the chief minister Vassakāra: If the Vajjis do not decree what has never previously been decreed, do not alter what has already been decreed, and properly respect and follow the principles of the ancient Vajjis, then Vajji will certainly excel; it will not decline.

The World-honored One further asked Venerable Ānanda, “Have you heard whether the Vajjis do not forcibly violate the wives of others or the daughters of others?” Venerable Ānanda replied, “World-honored One, I have heard that the Vajjis do not forcibly violate the wives of others or the daughters of others.” The World-honored One again said to the chief minister Vassakāra, “If the Vajjis do not forcibly violate the wives of others or the daughters of others, then Vajji will certainly excel; it will not decline.” The World-honored One further asked Venerable Ānanda: Have you heard whether all the Vajjis together revere famous, virtuous, and honorable Vajjis, respecting them, supporting them, and accepting the teachings received from them?^100 Venerable Ānanda replied: World-honored One, I have heard that all the Vajjis together revere famous, virtuous, and honorable Vajjis, respecting them, supporting them, and accepting the teachings received from them. The World-honored One said again to the chief minister Vassakāra: If all the Vajjis together revere famous, virtuous, and honorable Vajjis, respecting them, supporting them, and accepting the teachings received from them, then Vajji will certainly excel; it will not decline. The World-honored One further asked Venerable Ānanda: Have you heard whether the Vajjis together adorn all the ancient Vajji shrines, respectfully make offerings to them, and perform ceremonies, continuing the earlier offerings without abandoning them and with no lessening in their earlier practices? Venerable Ānanda replied: World-honored One, I have heard that the Vajjis together adorn all the ancient Vajji shrines, respectfully make offerings to them, and perform ceremonies, continuing the earlier offerings without abandoning them and with no lessening in their earlier practices.

The World-honored One again said to the chief minister Vassakāra:

If the Vajjis together adorn all the ancient Vajji shrines, respectfully make offerings to them, and perform ceremonies, continuing the earlier offerings without abandoning them and with no lessening in their earlier practices, then Vajji will certainly excel; it will not decline.

The World-honored One further asked Venerable Ānanda:

Have you heard whether all of the Vajjis together support arahants, holding them in the highest reverence, always wishing that arahants who have not yet come [to Vajji] may wish to come and that those who have come may delight in staying permanently, and always ensuring that they do not lack robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and seats, and medicines, all the requisites of life?^101

Venerable Ānanda replied:

World-honored One, I have heard that all of the Vajjis together support arahants, holding them in highest reverence, constantly wishing that ara- hants who have not yet come [to Vajji] may wish to come and that those who have come may delight in staying permanently, and always ensuring that they do not lack robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and seats, and medicines, all the requisites of life.

The World-honored One again said to the chief minister Vassakāra:

If all of the Vajjis together support arahants, holding them in highest rev- erence, constantly wishing that arahants who have not yet come [to Vajji] may wish to come and that those who have come may delight in staying permanently, and always ensuring that they do not lack robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and seats, and medicines, all the requisites of life, then Vajji will certainly excel; it will not decline. Vassakāra, the Vajjis are implementing these seven principles for non- decline; they all accept and uphold these seven principles for non-decline. Vajji will certainly excel; it will not decline.

Then the chief minister Vassakāra rose from his seat, arranged his clothes

so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with palms joined toward the Buddha, and said: Gotama, if those Vajjis had accomplished just one of the principles for non-decline, then King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha would not be able to overcome them—let alone being endowed with all seven principles for non-decline! Gotama, having many affairs of state [to attend to], I ask [permission] to return. The World-honored One replied, “[If] you wish to leave, do as you wish.” Then the chief minister Vassakāra, having heard what the Buddha said, received it and memorized it well. Rising [from his seat], he circumambulated the World-honored One three times and left.^102 Then, soon after the chief minister Vassakāra had left, the World-honored One turned around and said: Ānanda, whatever monks are dwelling in the various places on Mount Vulture Peak, tell them all to gather in the assembly hall. When they have all gathered there, come and tell me. Venerable Ānanda received the instruction from the Buddha, [saying,] “Yes, World-honored One.” Then Venerable Ānanda made this announcement, “Whatever monks are dwelling in the various places on Mount Vulture Peak should now all gather in the assembly hall!” When they had all gathered there, he returned to the Buddha, paid homage with his head, stepped back, and stood to one side. He said: World-honored One, I have announced that whatever monks are dwelling in the various places on Mount Vulture Peak should all now gather in the assembly hall. They have all now gathered. May the World-honored One himself know the right time. Then the World-honored One, followed by Venerable Ānanda, approached the assembly hall. He sat down on a seat prepared in front of the sangha of monks and addressed the monks, “I shall now teach you seven principles for non-decline. You should listen closely and pay proper attention.”^103 Then the monks said, “Yes.”

The Buddha said:

What are the seven? If the monks conduct frequent assemblies, if they often meet together, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks conduct their assemblies collaboratively, attend to the affairs of the Sangha collaboratively, and conclude [the assemblies] col- laboratively, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks do not decree what has never previously been decreed, do not alter what has already been decreed, and properly respect and follow the moral precepts that I have propounded, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks do not follow craving and desire for future existence, accom- panied by craving and delight in arising in this or that existence, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks revere their elders, those highly regarded ones that train together with them in the holy life, if they all respect them, support them, and accept the teachings received from them, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks delight in staying in secluded places, mountain forests, high crags, peaceful places without noise, distant places without distur- bance, free of people, places conducive to sitting in meditation, and do not leave them, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If all the monks together support their companions in the holy life, very much holding them in solemn reverence, constantly wishing that compan- ions in the holy life who have not yet come [to their monastery] may wish to come and that those who have come may delight in staying permanently, and always ensuring that they do not lack robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and seats, and medicines, all the requisites of life, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks implement these seven principles of non-decline, accept and uphold them, and do not violate them, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline.^104

Then the World-honored One again said to the monks, “I shall teach you another seven principles for non-decline. Listen closely and pay proper atten- tion.”^105 Then the monks said, “Yes.” The Buddha said: What are the seven? If the monks are reverential toward their teacher, venerate him, give him supreme and full support, and are respectful, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks are reverential toward the Dharma... the Sangha... morality... diligence... offerings [which they have received]... con- centration, and give supreme and full support for it and are respectful of it, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks implement these seven principles for non-decline, accept and uphold them, and do not violate them, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. The World-honored One again said to the monks, “I shall teach you another seven principles for non-decline. Listen closely and pay proper attention.”^106 Then the monks said, “Yes.” The Buddha said: What are the seven? If the monks do not engage in [excessive] activity, do not delight in activity, do not make a habit of activity, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. [If they] do not engage in noisy talk, do not delight in noisy talk, do not make a habit of noisy talk... if they do not engage in socializing, do not delight in socializing, do not make a habit of socializing... if they do not engage in mixing with company, do not delight in mixing with company, do not make a habit of mixing with company... if they do not engage in over- sleeping, do not delight in oversleeping, do not make a habit of oversleep- ing... if they do not undertake the holy life for the sake of profit, for the sake of fame, or for the sake of other people... if they do not give up making an effort midway for the sake of something temporary, nor for the sake of outdoing others in virtue [but instead become truly] excellent

in virtue—then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks implement these seven principles for non-decline, accept and uphold them, and do not violate them, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. The World-honored One again said to the monks, “I shall teach you another seven principles for non-decline. Listen closely and pay proper attention.”^107 Then the monks said, “Yes.” The Buddha said: What are the seven? If the monks are accomplished in the treasure of faith, the treasure of morality... the treasure of shame... the treasure of scruple... the treasure of learning... the treasure of generosity... and the treasure of wisdom, then the monks will certainly excel; conse- quently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks implement these seven principles for non-decline, accept and uphold them, and do not violate them, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. The World-honored One again said to the monks, “I shall teach you another seven principles for non-decline. Listen closely and pay proper attention.” Then the monks said, “Yes.” The Buddha said: What are the seven? If the monks are accomplished in the power of faith... the power of energy... the power of shame... the power of scruple... the power of mindfulness... the power of samādhi... and the power of wisdom, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks implement these seven principles for non-decline, accept them and uphold them, and do not violate them, then the monks will cer- tainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. The World-honored One again said to the monks, “I shall teach you another seven principles for non-decline. Listen closely and pay proper attention.”^108 Then the monks said, “Yes.”

The Buddha said: What are the seven? If the monks cultivate the mindfulness factor of awak- ening, which is based on seclusion, based on dispassion, based on cessation, and inclines toward release... if they cultivate the investigation-of- dharmas... energy... joy... tranquility... samādhi... the equa- nimity factor of awakening, which is based on seclusion, based on dis- passion, based on cessation, and inclines toward release, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks implement these seven principles for non-decline, accept and uphold them, and do not violate them, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. The World-honored One again said to the monks, “I shall teach you another seven principles for non-decline. Listen closely and pay proper attention.”^109 Then the monks said, “Yes.” The Buddha said: What are the seven? If, in settling litigation, the monks use the rule of confrontation in cases that require the rule of confrontation; if they use the rule of memory in cases that require the rule of memory;... the rule of nondelusion in cases that require the rule of nondelusion;... confession in cases that require confession;... majority [decision] in cases that require majority [decision];... exposing [of bad character] in cases that require exposing [of bad character]; and if, in dealing with disputes that arise in the sangha, they use the method that resembles sweeping away excrement with a broom, then the monks will certainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline. If the monks implement these seven principles for non-decline, accept them and uphold them, and do not violate them, then the monks will cer- tainly excel; consequently the Dharma will not decline.

Then the World-honored One again said to the monks, “I shall teach you six principles of cordiality. Listen closely and pay proper attention.”^110 Then the monks said, “Yes.” The Buddha said:

What are the six? If a monk undertakes bodily deeds of loving-kindness toward his companions in the holy life, this is a principle of cordiality, a principle of affection, a principle that delights; it results in affection, in being valued, in being respected, in being revered, in being cultivated, in being included; it leads to being a [true] renunciant, to attaining unification of the mind, to attaining energy, and to attaining nirvana. In the same way, undertaking verbal deeds of loving-kindness... mental deeds of loving-kindness... sharing one’s gains gotten in accor- dance with the Dharma, one’s own food, even what is in one’s bowl, by giving to one’s companions in the holy life, this is a principle of cordiality, a principle of affection, a principle that delights; it results in affection, in being valued, in being respected, in being revered, in being cultivated, in being included; it leads to being a [true] renunciant, to attaining unification of the mind, to attaining energy, and to attaining nirvana. If one has moral discipline that is not deficient, not defective, not defiled, not blackened; if one is [firm] like the earth, not swayed by others, praised by the noble ones, endowed with it and accepting and upholding it well, then sharing such moral discipline with one’s companions in the holy life is a principle of cordiality, a principle of affection, a principle that delights, that results in affection, in being valued, in being respected, in being revered, in being cultivated, in being included. It leads to becoming a [true] renunciant, to attaining unification of the mind, to attaining energy, and to attaining nirvana. If one has the vision that is a noble release, a deep understanding that is able rightly to eradicate _dukkha,_ then sharing such vision with one’s companions in the holy life is a principle of cordiality, a principle of affec- tion, a principle that delights; it results in affection, in being valued, in being respected, in being revered, in being cultivated, in being included; it leads to becoming a [true] renunciant, to attaining unification of the mind, to attaining energy, and to attaining nirvana. When I spoke earlier of six principles of cordiality, it was in relation to this that I spoke. Thus said the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma142-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA40.2]] |  |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA196]], [[MN104]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA142]]
> ◄  [[ma141-bdk]] 📜  [[ma143-bdk]] ►
