---
sutta_code: "MA157"
sutta_title:
  - "黃蘆園 "
  - "At Yellow Reed Park"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA157]]
> ◄  [[ma156-bdk]] 📜  [[ma158-bdk]] ►

### 157. The Discourse in the Yellow Reed Park

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Verañjā in the Yellow Reed Park. At that time a brahmin of Verañjā, who was very old, whose life span was almost over, whose life was on the verge of coming to an end, a hundred and twenty years [of age], walking with the support of a staff, while roaming around in the afternoon, approached the Buddha and exchanged polite greet- ings. Standing before the Buddha supported by his staff, he said:

Gotama, I have heard that the renunciant Gotama, who is very young and has just gone forth to train [in the path], on being personally approached by famous and virtuous renunciants and brahmins, does not show respect for them, does not revere them, does not get up from his seat, and does not invite them to be seated. Gotama, this is very improper. The World-honored One said: Brahmin, I have never seen anyone, among deva s and māra s, Brahmās, renunciants, brahmins, from human beings to deva s who, on approaching me could expect me, the Tathāgata, to show respect and reverence for them, to get up from my seat and invite them to be seated. Brahmin, if someone were to approach me, the Tathāgata, desiring that I should show respect and reverence, get up from my seat, and invite them to be seated, then that person’s head would certainly split into seven pieces. The brahmin said, “Gotama lacks taste.” The World-honored One said: Brahmin, there is a way in which I do lack taste, though it is not what you are referring to. Whatever there is of taste in forms, taste in sounds, taste in fragrances, [taste in flavors,]^262 taste in tangibles, the Tathāgata has eradicated it through wisdom, brought it to cessation, uprooted it so that it can never arise again. This is a way in which I lack taste, though it is not what you are referring to. The brahmin said again, “Gotama is without fear.”^263

The World-honored One said: Brahmin, there is a way in which I am without fear, though it is not what you are referring to. Whatever is fearsome in forms, fearsome in sounds, fearsome in odors, fearsome in flavors, fearsome in tangibles, the Tathāgata has eradicated it through wisdom, brought it to cessation, uprooted it so that it can never arise again. This is a way in which I am without fear, though it is not what you are referring to. The brahmin said again, “Gotama does not enter a womb.” The World-honored One said: Brahmin, there is a way in which I do not enter a womb, though it is not what you are referring to. If there is some renunciant or brahmin who has, through wisdom, eradicated future coming to a womb, brought it to cessation, uprooted it so that he will never take birth again, then of him I say that he does not enter a womb. The Tathāgata has, through wisdom, eradicated future coming to a womb, brought it to cessation, uprooted it so that he will never take birth again. For this reason I will not enter a womb. This is a way in which I do not enter a womb, though it is not what you are referring to. Brahmin, among these living beings who have come from ignorance, delight in ignorance, are covered by ignorance, are trapped in the eggshell of ignorance, I am the first to have insight into the Dharma. I am foremost among living beings. It is just like a hen that has laid ten or twelve eggs and is mindful of them at the proper time, shelters them at the proper time, warms them at the proper time, sustains them at the proper time. Later on, [even if] the hen may have left them alone [at that time], one of the chicks pecks through its shell with its beak or claws and emerges safely. That one is foremost among the chicks. I am like this. Of these living beings who have come from ignorance, delight in ignorance, are covered by ignorance, are trapped in the eggshell of ignorance, I am the first to have insight into the Dharma, I am foremost among living beings. Brahmin, taking mugwort grass, I went to the tree of awakening, spread the grass beneath the tree, placed my sitting mat on it, and sat

down cross-legged [with this resolve]: “I will not break this upright sitting posture until the taints have been destroyed.” And I did not break that upright sitting posture until the taints had been destroyed.^264 Sitting upright, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, I attained and dwelt in the first absorption, which is with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion. At that time this was the first higher state of mind that I reached, attaining a pleasant abiding in the present, attaining it easily and without difficulty, a pleasant dwelling without fear, peaceful and delightful, which leads to nirvana. Again, brahmin, with the calming of [directed] awareness and [sus- tained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, I attained and dwelt in the second absorption, which is without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, and with rapture and happiness born of samādhi. At that time this was the second higher state of mind that I reached, attaining a pleasant abiding in the present, attaining it easily and without difficulty, a pleasant dwelling without fear, peaceful and delightful, which leads to nirvana. Again, brahmin, secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling in equa- nimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, experiencing happiness with the body, I attained and dwelt in the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equa- nimity and mindfulness, a happy abode. At that time this was the third higher state of mind that I reached, attaining a pleasant abiding in the present, attaining it easily and without difficulty, a pleasant dwelling without fear, peaceful and delightful, which leads to nirvana. Again, brahmin, with the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of joy and displeasure, with neither- pain-nor-pleasure, and with purity of mindfulness and equanimity, I attained and dwelt in the fourth absorption. At that time this was the fourth higher state of mind that I reached, attaining a pleasant abiding in the present, attaining it easily and without difficulty, a pleasant dwelling without fear, peaceful and delightful, which leads to nirvana. Again, brahmin, with my mind collected and purified in this way, without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, having

gained mental imperturbability, I trained in the realization of the higher knowledge of the recollection of former lives. I recalled countless former lives traversed by me in the past, together with my activities and my out ward appearance [in those lives]: one birth, two births, a hundred births, a thousand births, eons of [world] expansion, eons of [world] contraction, countless eons of [world] expansion and contraction. [I recalled:] “I was that living being named So-and-so. [I] went through those past experiences; I was [once] born there, with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of food and drink, experiencing this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this. Dying here, I was reborn there; dying there, I was reborn here. I was reborn here with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of food and drink, experiencing this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this.” This was the first higher knowledge that I attained at that time in the first watch of the night, having formerly been without negligence, having delighted in being established in seclusion, and having energetically cul tivated it. Thus lack of wisdom was eradicated and wisdom arose, darkness was destroyed and knowledge accomplished, ignorance was eradicated and knowledge arose, namely by realizing the higher knowledge of recollecting past lives. Again, brahmin, with my mind collected and purified in this way, without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, having gained mental imperturbability, I trained in the realization of the higher knowledge of the death and rebirth [of beings]. With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human [eye], I saw beings as they die and as they are reborn, handsome or ugly, superior or inferior, as they come and go between good and bad realms of existence, in accordance with the [previous] deeds of these living beings. I saw as it really is that, if these living beings have undertaken evil bodily conduct, evil verbal and mental conduct, if they have reviled noble ones, held wrong views, and undertaken actions [based on] wrong views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking up of the

body after death they certainly go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. If [however], these living beings have undertaken sublime bodily con- duct, sublime verbal and mental conduct, if they have not reviled noble ones, have held right views, and undertaken actions [based on] right views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking up of the body after death they certainly go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in a heavenly realm. This was the second higher knowledge that I attained at that time in the middle watch of the night, by having formerly been without negligence, having delighted in being established in seclusion, and having energetically cultivated it. Thus lack of wisdom was eradicated and wisdom arose, darkness was destroyed and knowledge accomplished, ignorance was eradicated and knowledge arose, namely by realizing the higher knowledge of the death and rebirth [of beings]. Again, brahmin, with my mind collected and purified in this way, without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, having gained mental imperturbability, I trained in the realization of the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints. I knew as it really is: “This is _dukkha._ ” I knew [as it really is]: “This is the arising of _dukkha._ ” I knew [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of _dukkha._ ” I knew as it really is: “This is the path to the cessation of _dukkha._ ” I knew as it really is: “These are the taints.” I knew [as it really is]: “This is the arising of the taints.” I knew [as it really is]: “This is the ces- sation of the taints.” I knew as it really is: “This is the path to the cessation of the taints.” Knowing like this, seeing like this, my mind was liberated from the taint of sensual desire... from the taint of existence, my mind was liberated from the taint of ignorance. It being liberated, I knew it was liberated, knowing as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” This was the third higher knowledge that I attained at that time in the last watch of the night, having formerly been without negligence, having

delighted in being established in seclusion, and having energetically cul tivated it. Thus lack of wisdom was eradicated and wisdom arose, darkness was destroyed and knowledge accomplished, ignorance was eradicated and knowledge arose, namely by realizing the higher knowledge of the destruc tion of the taints. Again, brahmin, if there is someone of whom it could rightly be said that he teaches to living beings that have arisen in the world a Dharma that is free from delusion, who is foremost among all living beings, who is not covered up by pain and pleasure, then you should know that it can rightly be said of me. Why is that? [It is because] I teach to living beings who have arisen in the world a Dharma that is free from delusion. I am foremost among all living beings. I am not covered up by pain and pleasure.^265 Then the brahmin of Verañjā put aside his staff, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, and said to the World-honored One: The World-honored One is foremost, the World-honored One is great, the World-honored One is superior, the World-honored One is supreme, the World-honored One has rank, the World-honored One is without equal, the World-honored One is incomparable, the World-honored One is without obstructions, the World-honored One is a person without obstructions.^266 World-honored One, from now on I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth until the end of life, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life.^267 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the brahmin of Verañjā and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma157-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA121]], [[]], [[SN8.7]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA157]]
> ◄  [[ma156-bdk]] 📜  [[ma158-bdk]] ►
