---
sutta_code: "MA153"
sutta_title:
  - "鬚閑提 "
  - "Māgaṇḍiya"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA153]]
> ◄  [[ma152-bdk]] 📜  [[ma154-bdk]] ►

### 153. The Discourse to Māgandiya

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying among the Kurus in the main quiet room of Bhāradvāja, seated on a seat of straw.

Then, when the night was over, at dawn, the World-honored One put on his [outer] robe, took his bowl, and went into Kammāsadhamma to beg for almsfood in [proper] sequence [from house to house]. Having partaken of the midday meal, he put away his [outer] robe and bowl, washed his hands and feet, put his sitting mat over his shoulder, and went to a certain grove for the day’s abiding. Then the World-honored One entered that grove, went to the base of a tree, spread out the sitting mat, and sat down cross-legged. At that time the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya, who was roaming about in the afternoon, approached the main quiet room of Bhāradvāja. The heterodox practitioner Māgandiya saw from afar that in the main quiet room of Bhāradvāja there was straw [to serve as] a seat and as a place for lying down on one’s side in the manner of a lion, in the manner of a renunciant, in the manner of a brahmin.^211 On seeing this, the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya asked Bhāradvāja: Whose is the straw seat, in your main quiet room, the place for lying down on one’s side in the manner of a lion, in the manner of a renunciant, in the manner of a brahmin? The brahmin Bhāradvāja replied: Māgandiya, there is the renunciant Gotama from the Sakya lineage who left the Sakya clan, shaved off his hair and beard, donned the yellow robes, and out of faith left the household life and became homeless to train in the path. He has realized the unsurpassable right and total awakening. His is the straw seat in the main quiet room, the place for lying down on one’s side in the manner of a lion, in the manner of a renunciant, in the manner of a brahmin. The heterodox practitioner Māgandiya said: Bhāradvāja, I am now seeing what should not be seen and hearing what should not be heard, namely seeing the place where the renunciant Gotama reclines. Why is that? The renunciant Gotama is a destroyer of the stages [of growth] and a destroyer of the stages [of growth] is useless. Bhāradvāja said:

Māgandiya, you should not condemn the renunciant Gotama on this account. Why is that? The renunciant Gotama has much wisdom. Wise warriors, wise brahmins, wise householders, and wise renunciants, who are spoken of as wise ones, all gain noble knowledge [from him]. Māgan - diya, I would like to tell the renunciant Gotama about this statement [of yours]. May I do so? Māgandiya said: Bhāradvāja, if you want to tell him, then do as you wish. I have no objec- tion. Bhāradvāja, if I were to see the renunciant Gotama, I too would tell him this statement. Why is that? [Because] the renunciant Gotama is a destroyer of the stages [of growth] and a destroyer of the stages [of growth] is useless. At that time the World-honored One was in the day’s abiding. With the purified divine ear that surpasses the human [ear] he heard the brahmin Bhāradvāja and the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya discussing this matter. Having heard it, the World-honored One rose from sitting in meditation and in the late afternoon approached the main quiet room of Bhāradvāja. He spread out his sitting mat on the straw seat and sat down cross-legged. The brahmin Bhāradvāja saw from afar the World-honored One [coming back from] the grove, dignified and beautiful, like the moon amid the stars, with a radiant aura, shining like a golden mountain, endowed with handsome appearance and lofty dignity, and with sense faculties calm, free of obstruction, accomplished and disciplined, with his mind calm and quiet.^212 Having seen the Buddha, he came forward to approach him, exchanged polite greetings, stepped back, and sat to one side. The World-honored One asked, “Bhāradvāja, did you have a conversation with the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya about this straw seat?” The brahmin Bhāradvāja answered the World-honored One:^213 That is so, Gotama. I had wanted to tell the renunciant Gotama about this matter; however, before I had said it, the renunciant Gotama has already come to know by himself. Why is that? Because he is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened.

[While] the World-honored One and the brahmin Bhāradvāja were discussing this matter, the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya, who was roaming around, approached the main quiet room of Bhāradvāja. On seeing from afar that the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya had come, the World-honored One said:

Māgandiya, one who does not restrain the eye faculty, does not guard it, and does not practice doing so, certainly experiences suffering as a result. That has been well restrained by the renunciant Gotama. He guards it well, and practices well doing so, and he certainly experiences happiness as a result. Māgandiya, is it for this reason that you say, “The renunciant Gotama is a destroyer of the stages [of growth], and a destroyer of the stages [of growth] is useless”? The heterodox practitioner Māgandiya answered the World-honored One, “That is so, Gotama.”

Māgandiya, in the same way, one who does not restrain the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body faculty... the mind faculty, does not guard it and does not practice doing so, will certainly experience suffering as a result. That has been well restrained by the renunciant Gotama. He guards it well, and practices well doing so, and he certainly experiences happiness as a result. Māgandiya, is it for this reason that you say, “The renunciant Gotama is a destroyer of the stages [of growth], and a destroyer of the stages [of growth] is useless”? The heterodox practitioner Māgandiya answered the World-honored One, “That is so, Gotama.” The World-honored One asked: Māgandiya, what do you think? Suppose a person who, before going forth to train in the path, cognizes with the eye forms that are longed for, pleasing to the mind, and connected with sensual desires. At a later time he gives up such forms cognized with the eye, shaves off his hair and beard, dons the yellow robes, and out of faith leaves the household life and becomes homeless to train in the path. Seeing as it really is the arising and ceasing of forms cognized by the eye, [seeing] their attraction, their peril, and the escape from them, he dwells with a mind at peace within.

Suppose that he then sees [another] person who is not yet detached from sensual desire for forms, who is consumed by craving for forms, who becomes heated up by the fever of forms. When he sees that person engaging with forms cognized by the eye, [forms] that are longed for, pleasing to the mind, and connected with sensual desire, at that time he does not praise them and does not rejoice with them. Māgandiya, what do you think? When [he sees] this pleasure, which is dependent on craving and dependent on forms, when that person is delighting in this pleasure, he does not praise them, because it is trifling and tawdry; he does not rejoice with them, because it is trifling and tawdry. Māgandiya, would you have something to say to him?^214

He answered the World-honored One, “No, Gotama.” [The World-honored One asked:]

Māgandiya, what do you think? Suppose a person who, before going forth to train in the path, in the same way cognizes sounds with the ear... odors with the nose... tastes with the tongue... tangibles with the body, [tangibles] that are longed for, pleasing to the mind, and connected with sensual desire. Suppose that at a later time he gives up such tangibles cog- nized with the body, shaves off his hair and beard, dons the yellow robes, and out of faith leaves the household life and becomes homeless to train in the path. Seeing as it really is the arising and ceasing of tangibles cog- nized by the body, [seeing] their attraction, their peril, and the escape from them, he dwells with a mind at peace within. Suppose that he then sees [another] person who is not yet detached from sensual desire for tangibles, who is consumed by craving for tangibles, who becomes heated up by the fever of tangibles. When he sees that person engaging with tangibles cognized by the body, [tangibles] that are longed for, pleasing to the mind, and connected with sensual desire, at that time he does not praise him and does not rejoice with him. Māgandiya, what do you think? When [he sees] this pleasure, which is dependent on craving and dependent on tangibles, when that person is delighting in this pleasure, he does not praise them, because it is trifling and tawdry; he does not rejoice with them, because it is trifling and tawdry. Māgandiya, would you have something to say to him?

He answered the World-honored One, “No, Gotama.” The World-honored One asked:^215 Māgandiya, what do you think? Suppose a person who, before going forth to train in the path, is [equipped] with the five strands of sensual pleasure, which are longed for, pleasing to the mind, and connected with sensual desire. At a later time he gives up the five strands of sensual pleasure, shaves off his hair and beard, dons the yellow robes, and out of faith leaves the household life and becomes homeless to train in the path. Seeing as it really is the arising and ceasing of the five strands of sensual pleasure, their attraction, their peril, and the escape from them, he dwells with a mind at peace within. Suppose that he then sees [another] person who is not yet detached from sensual desire, who is consumed by sensual craving, who becomes heated up by the fever of sensual pleasures. When he sees that person engaging with the five strands of sensual pleasures, which are longed for, pleasing to the mind, and connected with sensual desire, at that time he does not praise them and does not rejoice with them. Māgandiya, what do you think? When [he sees] this pleasure, which is dependent on sensual desire and dependent on sensual craving, when that person is delighting in this pleasure, he does not praise them, because it is trifling and tawdry; he does not rejoice with them, because it is trifling and tawdry. Māgandiya, would you have something to say to him? He answered the World-honored One, “No, Gotama.” [The World-honored One said:] Māgandiya, at the time before I had gone forth to train in the path, I obtained easily, without difficulty, the five strands of sensual pleasure, which are longed for, pleasing to the mind, and connected with sensual desire.^216 At a later time I gave up the five strands of sensual pleasure, shaved off my hair and beard, donned the yellow robes, and out of faith left the household life and became homeless to train in the path. Seeing as it really is the arising and ceasing of the five strands of sensual pleasure, their attraction, their peril, and the escape from them, I dwell with a mind at peace within.

I see a person who is not yet detached from sensual desire, who is con- sumed by sensual craving, who becomes heated up by the fever of sensual desire. When I see that person engaging with the five strands of sensual pleasure, which are longed for, pleasing to the mind, and connected with sensual desire, at that time I do not praise them and do not rejoice with them. Māgandiya, what do you think? When [I see] this pleasure, which is dependent on sensual desire and dependent on sensual craving, when that person is delighting in this pleasure, I do not praise them, because it is trifling and tawdry; I do not rejoice with them, because it is trifling and tawdry. Māgandiya, have you something to say to me?

He answered the World-honored One, “No, Gotama.” The World-honored One said:

Māgandiya, suppose [there is] a householder or the son of a householder who enjoys much wealth and prosperity, immeasurable property, plentiful livestock, tenants, and feudatories, and who is endowed with an abundance of the various requisites of life. He obtains easily, without difficulty, the five strands of sensual pleasure. He accomplishes good conduct of the body... of speech... and good conduct of mind. When he is near death he does not wish to let go of the five strands of sensual pleasure. With the breaking up of the body at death he ascends to a good realm of existence and attains rebirth in some heaven, where he dwells equipped with the five strands of [heavenly] sensual pleasure. Māgandiya, would this _deva_ or son of a _deva_ prefer to give up the five strands of heavenly sensual pleasure, delight- ing in human sensual pleasure and longing for it?

He answered the World-honored One:

No, Gotama. Why is that? Human sensual pleasure is foul and impure.^217 To his mind it would be extremely unclean and unapproachable. He would detest it as wretched. Gotama, heavenly sensual pleasure is superior to human sensual pleasure, more sublime, more excellent. That that _deva_ or son of a _deva_ would give up the five strands of heavenly sensual pleasure, delighting in human sensual pleasure and longing for it—that is not possible.

[The World-honored One said:]

Māgandiya, in the same way, I abandoned human sensual pleasure and crossed over to heavenly sensual pleasure by shaving off my hair and beard, donning the yellow robes, and out of faith leaving the household life and becoming homeless to train in the path. Seeing as it really is the arising and ceasing of the five strands of sensual pleasure, their attraction, their peril, and the escape from them, I dwell with a mind at peace within. I see a person who is not yet detached from sensual desire, who is con sumed by sensual craving, who becomes heated up by the fever of sensual desire. When I see that person engaging with the five strands of sensual pleasure, which are longed for, pleasing to the mind, and connected with sensual desire, at that time I do not praise them and do not rejoice with them. Māgandiya, what do you think? When they have this pleasure, which is dependent on sensual desire and dependent on sensual craving, when that person is delighting in this pleasure, I do not praise them, because it is trifling and tawdry; I do not rejoice with them, because it is trifling and tawdry. Māgandiya, have you something to say to me? He answered the World-honored One, “No, Gotama.” The World-honored One said: Māgandiya, suppose a person afflicted with leprosy, their body covered in blisters, being eaten by maggots, who scratches their sores open with their fingernails and goes to a firepit to cauterize them. Māgandiya, what do you think? That person afflicted with leprosy, their body covered in blisters, being eaten by maggots, who scratches their sores open with their fingernails and goes to a firepit to cauterize them—would this person, by this means, succeed in getting rid of their disease and becoming strong, without damaging their faculties, shaking off the leprosy, with their body becoming completely healthy, becoming just as it was before, returning to its former condition?^218 He answered the World-honored One: No Gotama. Why is that? That person afflicted with leprosy, their body covered in blisters, being eaten by maggots, who scratches their sores open with their fingernails and goes to a firepit to cauterize them—by this means they will cause even more sores to arise, and cause the earlier sores

to become bigger. Yet, they get pleasure from [scratching and cauterizing] their leprosy sores.

[The World-honored One said:]

Māgandiya, just as that person afflicted with leprosy, their body covered in blisters, being eaten by maggots, who scratches their sores open with their fingernails and goes to a firepit to cauterize them and by this means causes even more sores to arise, and the earlier sores to become bigger, yet gets pleasure from their leprosy sores—in the same way, Māgandiya, living beings who are not detached from sensual desire, who are consumed by sensual craving, who become heated up by the fever of sensual desire, nevertheless engage in sensual pleasure. Māgandiya, in this way living beings who are not detached from sensual desire, who are consumed by sensual craving, who become heated up by the fever of sensual desire, nevertheless engage in sensual pleasure. In this way their sensual desire increases, their sensual craving increases, yet they get pleasure from their sensual craving. If they do not abandon sensual desire, do not become detached from sensual craving, then it is impossible that they should dwell, in the past, in the future, or in the present, with a mind at peace within. Why is that? This is not the way to abandon sensual desire and become detached from sensual craving, namely engaging in sensual pleasures.

The World-honored One said:

Māgandiya, suppose a king or a great minister obtains the five strands of sensual pleasures easily, without difficulty. If he does not abandon sensual desire, does not become detached from sensual craving, then it is impossible that he should dwell, in the past, in the future, or in the present, with a mind at peace within. Why is that? This is not the way to abandon sensual desire and become detached from sensual craving, namely engaging in sensual pleasures. In this way, Māgandiya, living beings who are not detached from sensual desire, who are consumed by sensual craving, who become heated up by the fever of sensual desire, engage in sensual pleasures. Māgandiya, if living beings are not detached from sensual desire, are consumed by sensual craving, become heated up by the fever of sensual

desire, and engage in sensual pleasure, then in this way their sensual desire increases, their sensual craving increases, yet they get pleasure from their sensual craving. If they do not abandon sensual desire, do not become detached from sensual craving, then it is impossible that they should dwell, in the past, in the future, or in the present, with a mind at peace within. Why is that? This is not the way to abandon sensual desire and become detached from sensual craving, namely engaging in sensual pleasures. Māgandiya, it is just like a person afflicted with leprosy, his body cov ered in blisters, being eaten by maggots, who scratches his sores open with his fingernails and goes to a firepit to cauterize them. Out of empathy and pity for him a person who seeks his welfare, who seeks his happiness and peace, gives him good medicine appropriate to his condition. Having taken that good medicine appropriate to his condition, he gets rid of the disease and gains strength, without damage to his faculties. Having shaken off the leprosy, his body becomes completely healthy, becomes just as it was before, returned to its former condition. If he sees a person who is afflicted by leprosy, his body covered in blisters, being eaten by maggots, who scratches his sores open with his fingernails and goes to a firepit to cauterize them, Māgandiya, having seen that person, would he feel delight in his mind and praise him joyfully? He answered the World-honored One, “No Gotama. Why is that? One who is sick needs medication; one who is not sick does not need it.” [The World-honored One said:] Māgandiya, what do you think? Consider that leper who has gotten rid of the disease in this way and gained strength, without damage to his fac ulties, having shaken off the leprosy, his body having become completely healthy, become as it was before, returned to its former condition. If two strong men seize him and take him to the firepit to cauterize him, then in that situation he would be writhing in fear, trying to avoid having his body scorched.^219 Māgandiya, what do you think? Is it that the firepit is now hotter, more painful, and more dangerous than previously? He answered the World-honored One: No, Gotama. Previously, when he was afflicted with leprosy, his body

covered in blisters, being eaten by maggots, and having scratched his sores open with his fingernails and having gone to the firepit to cauterize them, he perceived the pain as a greatly pleasurable contact, his mind being deranged and his perception distorted. Gotama, having now gotten rid of the disease in this way and having gained strength, without damage to his faculties, having shaken off the leprosy, his body completely healthy, becoming just as it was before, returned to its former condition, he per- ceives what is painful as greatly painful, his mind being composed and his perception not being distorted.

[The World-honored One said:]

Māgandiya, just as a person afflicted with leprosy, his body covered in blisters, being eaten by maggots, scratching his sores open with his fin- gernails and going to a firepit to cauterize them, perceives what is painful as a greatly pleasurable contact, his mind being deranged and his perception distorted—in the same way, Māgandiya, living beings who are not detached from sensual desire, who are consumed by sensual craving, who become heated up by the fever of sensual desire and engage in sensual pleasures, perceive sensual pleasures that are painful as pleasurable, their minds being deranged and their perceptions distorted. Māgandiya, just as that person who has gotten rid of the disease and gained strength, without damage to his faculties, having shaken off the leprosy, his body becoming completely healthy, just as it was before, returned to its former condition, perceives what is painful as greatly painful contact, his mind being composed and his perception no longer distorted— in the same way, Māgandiya, I perceive sensual pleasures that are painful as painful, because I have attained the truth and my perception is not dis- torted. Why is that? Māgandiya, in the past sensual pleasure was impure and foul, very dirty and objectionable to the mind, to be disliked as painful to touch. In the future... In the present, sensual pleasure is impure and foul, very dirty and objectionable to the mind, to be disliked as painful to touch. Māgandiya, the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, says:

Freedom from disease is the supreme gain; Nirvana is the supreme happiness.^220

The heterodox practitioner Māgandiya said to the World-honored One: Gotama, in the past I also heard from ancient senior elders who practiced the holy life, Freedom from disease is the supreme gain; Nirvana is the supreme happiness. The World-honored One asked him: Māgandiya, if you heard in the past from ancient senior elders who prac ticed the holy life, Freedom from disease is the supreme gain; Nirvana is the supreme happiness. Māgandiya, what is freedom from disease? What is nirvana? At this, the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya stroked with both hands his body—which is [comparable to] an illness, a tumor, a thorn, a snake, which is impermanent, dukkha, empty, not-self—and said, “Gotama, this is freedom from disease. This is nirvana.”^221 The World-honored One said: Māgandiya, it is just as if someone born blind were to hear a person with eyesight say, “Pure white, without a stain; pure white without a stain,” and having heard this, were to go searching for this pure whiteness. A swindler, not seeking [the blind person’s] welfare, not seeking his happiness and peace, hands him a dirty, greasy, impure cloth and says, “You should know, this is a pure white, stainless cloth. Respectfully accept it with both hands and wear it on your body.” The blind person is delighted, respectfully accepts it with both hands, and puts it on his body, saying, “Pure white, without a stain; pure white without a stain.” Māgandiya, does that person speak knowing for himself or does he speak not knowing for himself? Does he speak seeing for himself or does he speak not seeing for himself? The heterodox practitioner Māgandiya replied, “Gotama, from what you say, he really does not know or see.” The World-honored One said:

In the same way, Māgandiya, like a blind person, without eyes, you have stroked with both hands your body—which is [comparable to] an illness, a tumor, a thorn, a snake, which is impermanent, _dukkha,_ empty, not- self—and said, “Gotama, this is freedom from disease. This is nirvana.” Māgandiya, you have never experienced freedom from disease. How much less could you know and see nirvana? It is impossible for you to say that you know and see it. Māgandiya, the Tathāgata, free from attach- ment, fully awakened, says, Freedom from disease is the supreme gain. Nirvana is the supreme happiness. Of all paths the eightfold right path Leads to peace, to the deathless.^222 Many people have heard of this, and many heterodox practitioners, having heard this stanza, have handed it down in turn, unable to understand its meaning. Having heard it they wish to seek instruction; [but,] being equally foolish, they mislead one another.^223 Their own present body is made up of the four elements, born of father and mother, to be nourished by food and drink constantly, to be clothed, massaged, and bathed, having to endure being mishandled, which is of a nature to deteriorate, to wear away, to fall apart. They see it as a self, cling to it as a self. Conditioned by clinging there is becoming; conditioned by becoming there is birth; conditioned by birth there are old age and death; conditioned by old age and death there are worry and woe, weeping and tears, sorrow and pain, distress and vexation. Thus arises this great mass of pure _dukkha._^224 Then the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya rose from his seat, arranged his robe to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:

Gotama, I now have complete faith in the renunciant Gotama. May the renunciant Gotama well teach me the Dharma so that I come to know what is freedom from disease, what is nirvana. The World-honored One said:

Māgandiya, if the eye of noble wisdom is not yet purified in you and I were to teach you the freedom from disease, nirvana, you would not be able to understand, and that would just be troublesome for me. Māgandiya, it is just as with a person born blind and someone else tells him, “You should know there are the colors blue, yellow, red, and white.” Māgandiya, because of what that other person said, would the person born blind know the colors blue, yellow, red, and white?^225 He answered the World-honored One, “No, Gotama.” [The World-honored One said:] In the same way, Māgandiya, if the eye of noble wisdom is not purified in you and I were to teach you the freedom from disease, nirvana, you would not be able to understand, and that would just be troublesome for me. Māgandiya, I shall tell you of a good medicine appropriate to your condition, to purify the unpurified eye of noble wisdom in you. Māgandiya, if the eye of noble wisdom becomes purified in you, you will understand for yourself what is freedom from disease, what is nirvana. Māgandiya, it is just as with a person born blind, whose relatives, out of empathy, seeking his welfare and seeking his happiness, call an eye doctor. That eye doctor gives him various treatments, such as [inducing] vomiting, [administering] a laxative, nasal instillations, rectal instillations, pricking the veins, or causing tears to flow. Māgandiya, it is possible that he recovers sight in both eyes. Māgandiya, if he recovers sight in both eyes, he sees for himself the colors blue, yellow, red, and white. He sees that dirty, greasy, impure cloth and thinks, “That person is my enemy. For a long time he has cheated me with this dirty greasy cloth.” He hates him, Māgandiya, and might even be capable of killing him. In the same way, Māgandiya, I shall tell you of a good medicine appro priate to your condition, to purify the unpurified eye of noble wisdom in you. Māgandiya, if the eye of noble wisdom becomes purified in you, you will understand for yourself what is freedom from disease, what is nirvana. Māgandiya, there are four principles that lead to purification of the eye of noble wisdom that has not yet been purified. What are the four? They are associating in a respectful and receptive manner with good friends, hear-

ing the good Dharma, giving it proper attention, and advancing in the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma.^226 Māgandiya, you should train like this. Associate in a respectful and receptive manner with good friends! Hear the good Dharma! Give it proper attention! Advance in the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma! Māgandiya, you should train like this. Māgandiya, having associated in a respectful and receptive manner with good friends, you will hear the good Dharma. Having heard the good Dharma, you will give it proper attention. Having given it proper attention, you will advance in the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. Having advanced in the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma, you will know _dukkha_ as it really is, you will know the arising of _dukkha_... , you will know the cessation of _dukkha_... and you will know the path leading to the cessation of _dukkha_ as it really is.^227 What is knowledge of _dukkha_ as it really is? It is that birth is _dukkha;_ old age is _dukkha_ ; disease is _dukkha;_ death is _dukkha;_ association with what is disliked is _dukkha;_ separation from what is loved is _dukkha;_ being unable to get what one wishes is _dukkha;_ in short, the five aggregates affected by clinging are _dukkha._ This is knowledge of _dukkha_ as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of _dukkha_ as it really is? It is craving, which brings future existence and is accompanied by delight and desire, wishing for this or that existence. This is knowledge of the arising of _dukkha_ as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of _dukkha_ as it really is? It is the remainderless cessation of craving, which brings future existence and is accompanied by delight and desire, wishing for this or that existence, its eradication, giving up, vomiting out, termination, fading away, disappear- ance, and appeasement. This is knowledge of the cessation of _dukkha_ as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of _dukkha_ as it really is? It is the noble eightfold path, right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. This is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of _dukkha_ as it really is. When this teaching was given, there arose in the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya the spotless, immaculate Dharma eye in regard to all phenomena.^228

Then the heterodox practitioner Māgandiya saw the Dharma, attained the Dharma, realized the bright pure Dharma; he abandoned doubt, went beyond perplexity; he became independent of other teachers, would never again follow others; and he became free of hesitation. Having been established in the attainment of the fruit, he had attained fearlessness in the Dharma taught by the World-honored One. Then he rose from his seat, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, and said, “World-honored One, may I obtain the going forth to train in the path, receive the full ordination, and become a monk?” The World-honored One said, “Welcome, monk! Practice the holy life!”^229 The heterodox practitioner Māgandiya obtained the going forth to train in the path. He received the full ordination and became a monk. Māgandiya, having gone forth to train in the path, having received the full ordination, came to know the Dharma and attained arahantship. Thus said the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Māgandiya was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma153-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN14.17]], [[SN14.18]], [[SN14.19]], [[SN14.20]], [[SN14.21]], [[SN14.22]], [[SN14.23]], [[SN14.24]], [[SN14.25]], [[SN14.27]], [[SN14.28]], [[SN14.29]], [[SN14.12]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA153]]
> ◄  [[ma152-bdk]] 📜  [[ma154-bdk]] ►
