---
sutta_code: "MA152"
sutta_title:
  - "鸚鵡 "
  - "With Subha"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA152]]
> ◄  [[ma151-bdk]] 📜  [[ma153-bdk]] ►

### 152. The Discourse to Suka

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time the young brahmin Suka,^194 the son of Todeyya, had gone to Rājagaha for some small matter and was staying in the home of a householder. Then the young brahmin Suka, the son of Todeyya, asked the householder with whom he was staying: Is there some renunciant or brahmin who is the leader and teacher of a congregation, head of a great congregation, respected by the people, whom I could go to visit to pay my respects at an appropriate time, such that when I pay my respects to him it will bring me delight? The householder replied:

There is, Beloved of the _Deva_ s. The renunciant Gotama of the Sakya lin- eage left the Sakya clan, shaved off his hair and beard, donned the yellow robes, and out of faith left the household life and became homeless to train in the path. He has awakened to the unsurpassable, right, and total awakening. Beloved of the _Deva_ s, you can go to visit him yourself at an appropriate time, call on him, and pay your respects to him. Perhaps when you pay your respects to him, your mind will experience delight. The young brahmin Suka asked further, “Where is the renunciant Gotama? I wish to visit him.” The householder replied, “The renunciant Gotama is staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. Go there and visit him.” Then the young brahmin Suka went out of the householder’s home where he was staying and approached the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. From afar the young brahmin Suka saw the World-honored One in the grove, dignified and beautiful, like the moon amid the stars, with a radiant aura, shining like a golden mountain, endowed with handsome appearance and lofty dignity, with calm sense faculties, free of obstruction, accomplished and disciplined, and with his mind calm and quiet.^195 On seeing the Buddha, he went forward and approached him. Having exchanged polite greetings, he stepped back, sat to one side, and said, “Gotama, I have a question I would like to ask. Will you listen if I venture to express it?” The World-honored One said, “Feel free to ask.” The young brahmin Suka asked: Gotama, according to what I have heard, one who lives at home will gain proper understanding and knowledge in accordance with the Dharma; one who goes forth to train in the path will not. I ask Gotama about this matter. The World-honored One replied, “This matter is uncertain.” The young brahmin Suka said, “Gotama, may you now analyze this matter for me?” The World-honored One said, “Young brahmin, listen closely and pay proper attention, and I shall give you an analytical explanation.”^196 The young brahmin Suka listened to receive the instruction.

The Buddha said: Young brahmin, if one who lives at home or one who has gone forth to train in the path practices wrongly, I do not commend them. Why is that? If one who lives at home or one who has gone forth to train in the path practices wrongly, they will not gain proper understanding and will not come to know in accordance with the Dharma. That is why, young brahmin, if one who lives at home or one who has gone forth to train in the path practices wrongly, I do not commend them. Young brahmin, if one who lives at home or one who has gone forth to train in the path practices rightly, I commend them. Why is that? Because if one who lives at home or one who has gone forth to train in the path practices rightly, they will certainly gain proper understanding and will come to know in accordance with the Dharma. That is why, young brahmin, if one who lives at home or one who has gone forth to train in the path practices rightly, I commend them. Young brahmin, this is how I speak. In speaking of these two states, I have analyzed them like this, and proclaimed them like this. [In contrast,] if a renunciant or brahmin is firmly entrenched in upholding a one-sided position, they will say, “This is true; anything else is false.”^197 The young brahmin Suka said: Gotama, according to what I have heard, living at home is of much profit, much virtue; going forth to train in the path is not. May I ask Gotama about this matter? The World-honored One replied, “This matter is uncertain.” The young brahmin Suka said, “Gotama, may you again analyze this matter for me?” The World-honored One said, “Young brahmin, listen closely and pay proper attention, and I shall give you an analytical explanation.” The young brahmin Suka listened to receive the instruction. The Buddha said: Young brahmin, for one who lives at home there is much adversity, much conflict, much that is unpleasant, and one who practices wrongly will not

gain much fruit, will not have much merit. It is just as in farming, where there is much adversity, much conflict, much that is unpleasant, and one who practices wrongly will not gain much fruit, will not have much merit. It is like that, young brahmin; if one lives at home it is also like that. Young brahmin, for one who has gone forth to train in the path, there is little adversity, little conflict, little that is unpleasant, and one who practices wrongly will not gain much fruit, not have much merit. It is just as in trade, where there is little adversity, little conflict, little that is unpleasant, and one who practices wrongly will not gain much fruit, not have much merit. It is like that, young brahmin; going forth to train in the path is also like that. Young brahmin, for one who lives at home there is much adversity, much conflict, much that is unpleasant, but if they practice rightly, they will gain much fruit, have much merit. It is just as in farming, where there is much adversity, much conflict, much that is unpleasant, but one who practices rightly will gain much fruit, have much merit. It is like that, young brahmin; if one lives at home it is also like that. Young brahmin, for one who has gone forth to train in the path there is little adversity, little conflict, little that is unpleasant, and one who practices rightly will gain much fruit, have much merit. It is just as in trade, where there is little adversity, little conflict, little that is unpleasant, and one who practices rightly will gain much fruit, have much merit. It is like that, young brahmin; going forth to train in the path is also like that. Young brahmin, this is how I speak. In speaking of these two states, I have analyzed them like this, and proclaimed them like this. [In contrast,] if a renunciant or brahmin is firmly entrenched in upholding a one-sided position, they will say, “This is true; anything else is false.” The young brahmin Suka said, “Gotama, the brahmins declare five prin- ciples to be of much fruit, of much merit, as making for happiness and attaining what is wholesome.” The World-honored One said: Those five principles, as declared by the brahmins to be of much fruit, of much merit, making for happiness and attaining what is wholesome— can you state them now, in this assembly?

The young brahmin Suka said, “Gotama, certainly I can. Why is that? Gotama, [because] I am now seated in this assembly.” The World-honored One said, “So, please state them.” The young brahmin Suka said: Gotama, listen well! Gotama, the first principle that the brahmins declare is truth, which is of much fruit, of much merit, making for happiness and attaining what is wholesome. The second is recitation... the third is prac- ticing generosity,^198... the fourth is ascetic practice... Gotama, the fifth principle that the brahmins declare is celibacy, which is of much fruit, of much merit, making for happiness and attaining what is wholesome. The World-honored One said: Since the brahmins declare five principles to be of much fruit, of much merit, as making for happiness and attaining what is wholesome, is there among these brahmins one brahmin who speaks like this: “As to these five principles, having here and now come to know them myself, awakened to them myself, realized them myself, I declare their fruit”? The young brahmin Suka said to the World-honored One, “No, Gotama.” The World-honored One said: Does their teacher, or the teacher of their teacher, up to seven generations of predecessors, speak like this, “As to these five principles, having here and now come to know them myself, awakened to them myself, realized them myself, I declare their fruit”? The young brahmin Suka said to the World-honored One, “No, Gotama.” Then the World-honored One asked: Young brahmin, in ancient times there were brahmins who have since died and passed away, reciters and memorizers of the sacred texts, trans- mitters of the sacred texts, and reciters of the Vedas—one called Aṭṭhaka, a second called Vāmaka, a third called Vāmadeva, a fourth called Vessāmitta, a fifth called Yamataggi, a sixth called Aṅgīrasa, a seventh called Vāseṭṭha, an eighth called Kassapa, a ninth called Bhāradvāja, and a tenth called Bhagu—whom the present-day brahmins regard as skilled

in textual recitation, as having practiced and trained in memorization. Did any of them speak like this, “As to these five principles, having here and now come to know them myself, awakened to them myself, realized them myself, I declare their fruit”? The young brahmin Suka said to the World-honored One, “No, Gotama. But the brahmins base their faith on what they have memorized.”^199 The World-honored One said: Since there is among the brahmins not one brahmin who speaks like this: “As to these five principles, having here and now come to know them myself, awakened to them myself, realized them myself, I declare their fruit”; and since there is no teacher, or teacher of a teacher, up to seven generations of predecessors, who speaks like this: “As to these five prin- ciples, having here and now come to know them myself, awakened to them myself, realized them myself, I declare their fruit”; and since among brah- mins of ancient times who have since died and passed away, reciters and memorizers of the sacred texts, transmitters of the sacred texts, and reciters of the Vedas—one called Aṭṭhaka, a second called Vāmaka, a third called Vāmadeva, a fourth called Vessāmitta, a fifth called Yamataggi, a sixth called Aṅgīrasa, a seventh called Vāseṭṭha, an eighth called Kassapa, a ninth called Bhāradvāja, and a tenth called Bhagu—whom the present-day brahmins regard as skilled in textual recitation, as having practiced and trained in memorization, none spoke like this: “As to these five principles, having here and now come to know them myself, awakened to them myself, realized them myself, I declare their fruit”; young brahmin, for these reasons, is not the faith of those brahmins in this without foundation? The young brahmin Suka said, “Gotama, it is truly without foundation. But the brahmins have heard it and then memorized it.” The World-honored One said: They are just like a group of blind children, each holding onto the other. Those in front do not see what is behind and what is in the middle, those in the middle do not see what is in front and what is behind, and those behind do not see what is in the middle and what is in front. Young brah- min, the generations of brahmins you speak of are just like that. Young

brahmin, those in front speak out of faith and those coming after them repeat what they have heard. The young brahmin Suka became angry with the World-honored One. He felt irritated and displeased, [wanting to] slander the World-honored One, to provoke the World-honored One, to speak abusively to the World-honored One. [Thinking:] “Gotama should be slandered; Gotama should be provoked; Gotama should be toppled,” he said to the World-honored One: The brahmin called Pokkarasāti of the Upamaññā clan speaks thus, “If some renunciant or brahmin [claims], ‘I have now attained knowledge and vision in a superhuman state,’ then on hearing this, I have a great laugh. In my mind I disapprove of it as vain and untrue, as not in accordance with the Dharma. How could a human being, born among human beings, pro claim themselves as having attained a superhuman state? If anyone says of a superhuman state, ‘I know it; I see it,’ this is not right.” Then the World-honored One thought: The young brahmin Suka has become angry with me, feeling irritated and displeased, [he wants to] slander me, to provoke me, to speak abusively to me. [Thinking,] “Gotama should be slandered; Gotama should be pro voked; Gotama should be toppled,” he said to me, “Gotama, the brahmin called Pokkarasāti of the Upamaññā clan speaks thus, ‘If some renunciant or brahmin [claims], “I have now attained knowledge and vision in a superhuman state,” then on hearing this, I have a great laugh. In my mind I disapprove of it as vain and untrue, as not in accordance with the Dharma. How could a human being, born among human beings, proclaim himself as having attained a superhuman state? If anyone says of a superhuman state, “I know it; I see it,” then this is not right.’” Knowing this, the World-honored One said: Young brahmin, does the brahmin Pokkarasāti of the Upamaññā clan know the thoughts in the minds of all renunciants and brahmins so that after that he speaks thus, “If some renunciant or brahmin [claims], ‘I have now attained knowledge and vision in a superhuman state,’ then on hearing this, I have a great laugh. In my mind I disapprove of it as vain and untrue,

as not in accordance with the Dharma. How could a human being, born among human beings, proclaim himself as having attained a superhuman state? If anyone says of a superhuman state, “I know it; I see it,” then this is not right.’” The young brahmin Suka replied: Gotama, the brahmin Pokkarasāti of the Upamaññā clan has a female slave called Punnikā, yet he is not able to know the thoughts in her mind. How could he hope to know the thoughts in the minds of all renunciants and brahmins? That he should know them is impossible. The World-honored One said: It is just as if a person born blind were to make this statement: “There are no black or white objects, nor is there seeing of black or white objects. There are no beautiful or ugly objects, nor is there seeing of beautiful or ugly objects. There are no long or short objects, nor is there seeing of long or short objects. There are no near or far objects, nor is there seeing of near or far objects. There are no thick or slender objects, nor is there seeing of thick or slender objects. From the beginning I have never seen or known them, therefore there are no such objects.” Would this statement by that person born blind be true? The young brahmin Suka answered the World-honored One: No Gotama. Why is that? There are black or white objects, and there is seeing of black or white objects. There are beautiful or ugly objects, and there is seeing of beautiful or ugly objects. There are long or short objects, and there is seeing of long or short objects. There are near or far objects, and there is seeing of near or far objects. There are thick or slender objects, and there is seeing of thick or slender objects. If [the person] says, “From the beginning I have never seen or known them, therefore there are no such objects,” then this statement by the person born blind is not true. [The World-honored One said,] “Young brahmin, in speaking as he does, is the brahmin Pokkarasāti of the Upamaññā clan not like that man born blind, without eyes?”

The young brahmin Suka answered the World-honored One, “Gotama, he is as if blind.” The World-honored One said: Young brahmin, what do you think? As to those brahmins of ancient times who have since died and passed away, reciters and memorizers of the sacred texts, transmitters of the sacred texts, and reciters of the Vedas, namely the brahmin Caṅkī, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi, the brahmin Pokkara sāti, and your father Todeyya, is what they said to be accepted or not accepted? Is it true or untrue? Should it be respected or despised?^200 The young brahmin Suka replied to the World-honored One: As to those brahmins of ancient times who have since died and passed away, reciters and memorizers of the sacred texts, transmitters of the sacred texts, and reciters of the Vedas, namely the brahmin Caṅkī, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi, the brahmin Pokkarasāti, and my father Todeyya, in my mind I wish to accept what they said, not to reject it; I wish [to hold] it as true, not as untrue; I wish to respect it, not to despise it. Then the World-honored One asked: Young brahmin, that statement by the brahmin Pokkarasāti of the Upa maññā clan: Is it not unacceptable, devoid of anything acceptable? Is it not untrue, devoid of any truth? Is it not despicable, devoid of anything to be respected? The young brahmin Suka replied to the World-honored One, “[What you say] is true, Gotama.” [The World-honored One said:] Again, young brahmin, there are five states that create obstruction, that create obscuration, that create blindness and loss of sight, that are capable of eroding wisdom, that tire one to no avail and do not lead to nirvana. What are the five? Young brahmin, sensual desire is the first state that cre ates obstruction, that creates obscuration, that creates blindness and loss of sight, that is capable of eroding wisdom, that tires one to no avail and does not lead to nirvana.

Young brahmin, ill will... identity view... clinging to precepts... doubt is the fifth state that creates obstruction, that creates obscuration, that creates blindness and loss of sight, that is capable of eroding wisdom, that tires one to no avail and does not lead to nirvana.^201 Young brahmin, what do you think? That one who is obstructed by these five states, obscured by them, entangled in them should, at will, have insight into what is of benefit for themselves, or insight into what is of benefit for others, or insight into what is of benefit for both, and [this person] should know the thoughts in the minds of all renunciants and brahmins? That is not possible. Young brahmin, the brahmin Pokkarasāti of the Upamaññā clan is stained by sensual desires, defiled by sensual desires. Touched by sensual desires and dependent on sensual desires,^202 he is attached to sensual desires. He enters into sensual desires, not seeing the danger in them. Not knowing the escape from them, he engages in sensual desires. He is obstructed by these five states, obscured by them, entangled in them. That he should, at will, have insight into what is of benefit for himself, or insight into what is of benefit for others, or insight into what is of benefit for both, and that he should know the thoughts in the minds of all renunciants and brahmins—that is not possible. Again, young brahmin, there are the five strands of sensual pleasure, which are longed for, pleasing to the mind, of desirable appearance, con- nected with sensual desire, and extremely pleasurable. What are the five? They are visible forms known by the eye, sounds known by the ear, odors known by the nose, flavors known by the tongue, and tangibles known by the body. Young brahmin, what do you think? Because of these five strands of sensual pleasure, do living beings experience pleasure and joy, [knowing] nothing that is superior to it? The young brahmin Suka said to the World-honored One, “It is like this, Gotama.” The World-honored One asked him: Young brahmin, what do you think? Of a fire that burns in dependence on grass and wood and a fire that burns without grass and wood, which one’s flame would be superior, more sublime, more superb?

The young brahmin Suka replied: Gotama, that a fire might burn without grass and wood, that is not possible except through supernormal power. [But,] Gotama, supposing that a fire could burn without grass and wood, then its flame would be superior, more sublime, more superb. The World-honored One said: It is like this, young brahmin, it is like this. That a fire might burn without grass and wood, that is not possible except through supernormal power. [But] supposing that a fire could burn without grass and wood, then its flame would be superior, more sublime, more superb. I shall now speak [in terms of that] supposition. Young brahmin, like the fire that burns in dependence on grass and wood, such is the delight and pleasure that living beings give rise to in dependence on sensual pleas ure and evil unwholesome states. They do not attain the pleasure of letting go and the tranquility of appeasement. Young brahmin, like the fire that burns without grass and wood, such is the pleasure of letting go that living beings give rise to independence on seclusion from sensual desires and through compliance with wholesome states. They attain the pleasure of letting go and the tranquility of appease ment.^203 The World-honored One said: Young brahmin, what do you think? A brahmin performs a sacrifice and practices generosity. Suppose a young warrior comes from the eastern direction and says, “I will get the best of the seats, the best water for wash ing, and the best food and drink.” Not getting the best of the seats, the best water for washing, or the best food and drink, he becomes resentful and harbors a grudge. Suppose a young brahmin comes from the southern direction and says, “I will get pure fine food in here.” Not getting pure fine food in here, he becomes resentful and harbors a grudge. Suppose a young merchant comes from the western direction and says, “I will get plenty of food in here.” Not getting plenty of food in here, he becomes resentful and harbors a

grudge. Suppose a young worker comes from the northern direction and says, “I will get much food in here.” Not getting much food in here, he becomes resentful and harbors a grudge. Young brahmin, what fruit do you declare for that brahmin practicing generosity in that way?^204 The young brahmin Suka said: Gotama, brahmins do not practice generosity with a mental attitude of causing others to become resentful and harbor a grudge. Gotama, you should know that brahmins practice generosity with a mental attitude of empathy. By having a mental attitude of empathy when practicing gen- erosity, they gain great merit. The World-honored One said: Then, young brahmin, do the brahmins not declare this as a sixth principle that is of great fruit and great merit, making for happiness and attaining what is wholesome? The young brahmin Suka replied to the World-honored One, “That is so, Gotama.” The World-honored One asked: Young brahmin, as to the five principles that the brahmins declare to be of great fruit and great merit, making for happiness and attaining what is wholesome, where do you see these principles often, among those who live at home or among those who have gone forth to train in the path? The young brahmin Suka replied: Gotama, as to the five principles that the brahmins declare to be of great fruit and great merit, as making for happiness and attaining what is whole- some, I see these principles often among those who have gone forth to train in the path, not among those who live at home. Why is that? For one who lives at home there are many affairs, many activities, there is much resentment, much quarreling, and one is not able to preserve the truth. Gotama, for one who goes forth to train in the path there are few affairs, few activities, there is little resentment and little quarreling, and one is certainly able to preserve the truth. Gotama, as to the truth, I

see it often among those who have gone forth to train in the path, not among those who live at home. Why is that? For one living at home there are many affairs, many activities, there is much resentment, much quarreling, one is not able to practice gen erosity... not able to practice reciting... not able to practice asceticism... not able to practice celibacy. Gotama, for one who goes forth to train in the path there are few affairs, few activities, there is little resentment and little quarreling, and one is certainly able to practice generosity... able to practice reciting... able to practice asceticism... able to practice celibacy. Gotama, as to the practice of celibacy, I see this principle often among those who have gone forth to train in the path, not among those who live at home. The World-honored One said: Young brahmin, the five principles that the brahmins declare to be of great fruit and of great merit, making for happiness and attaining what is whole some, I say that they arise from the mind. What kind of mind? It is a mind that is free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or contention, because of having been cultivated.^205 Young brahmin, what do you think? If a monk protects the truth, then because of protecting the truth he gains gladness and gains joy. Young brahmin, that gladness and that joy, I say, which are well conjoined with what is wholesome, arise from the mind. What kind of mind? It is a mind that is free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or contention, because it has been cultivated. Young brahmin, in this way [if] one is able to practice generosity... one is able to gain learning... one is able to practice asceticism... one is able to practice celibacy, and because of practicing celibacy [the person] gains gladness and gains joy. Young brahmin, that gladness and that joy, I say, which are well conjoined with what is wholesome, arise from the mind. What kind of mind? It is a mind that is free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or contention.^206 With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwells [mentally] per vading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction,

and also the four intermediate directions and above and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or contention, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. In the same way with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity, free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or conflict, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. Young brahmin, it is just as if there were a skilled conch-blower. He goes to a place where nobody has ever heard [the sound of a conch]. He mounts a high hill at midnight, and with all his might he blows the conch. A wonderful sound comes out of it that pervades the four directions. In the same way, with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, a monk dwells [mentally] pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions and above and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with lov- ing-kindness, free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or contention, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. In the same way with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity, free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or conflict, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated.^207 Young brahmin, what do you think? Suppose that someone is seeking [to become] a _deva_ and, because of really seeking [to reach] a _deva_ realm, he dwells with a lustful mind [thinking], “May I become a _deva_ or one among the _deva_ s!” Suppose that someone [else] is seeking [to become] a _deva_ and, because of really seeking [to reach] a _deva_ realm, he dwells free of fetters, free of resentment, without ill will or contention, [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, and well cultivated, with a collected mind, mentally liberated; and [this person] dwells having fully accomplished this, [thinking,] “May I become a _deva_ or one among the _deva_ s!” As you see it, who [of these two] will become a _deva_ or one among the _deva_ s?

The young brahmin Suka replied:

Gotama, if someone is seeking [to become] a deva and, because of really seeking [to reach] a deva realm, he dwells free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or contention, [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, and well cultivated, with a collected mind, mentally liberated, and dwells having fully accomplished this then, as I see it, [this person] will certainly become a deva or one among the deva s. The World-honored One asked: Young brahmin, what do you think? Suppose that someone is seeking [to become] Brahmā and, because of really seeking [to reach] the heaven of Brahmā, he dwells with a lustful mind, [thinking,] “May I become Brahmā or one among the Brahmā deva s!” Suppose that someone [else] is seeking [to become] Brahmā and, because of really seeking [to reach] the heaven of Brahmā, he dwells free of fetters or resentment, without ill will or con tention, [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, and well cultivated, with a collected mind, mentally liberated; and [this person] dwells having fully accomplished this, [thinking,] “May I become Brahmā or one among the Brahmā deva s!” As you see it, who [of these two] will become Brahmā or one among the Brahmā deva s? The young brahmin Suka replied: Gotama, if someone is seeking [to become] Brahmā and, because of really seeking [to reach] the heaven of Brahmā dwells free of fetters or resent ment, without ill will or contention, [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, and well cultivated, with a collected mind, mentally liberated; and [this person] dwells having fully accomplished this then, as I see it, they will certainly become Brahmā or one among the Brahmā deva s. The young brahmin Suka asked, “Gotama, do you know the path to Brahmā?”^208 The World-honored One said: Young brahmin, I will now ask you. Answer according to your under standing. Young brahmin, what do you think? Is the village of Naḷakāra not far from this assembly?

The young brahmin Suka replied, “It is not far.” The World-honored One said: Young brahmin, what do you think? [Suppose] you tell someone in this assembly, “You go to the village of Naḷakāra and, on arriving there, come back right away.” [The person] receives your instructions, quickly goes to the village of Naḷakāra and on arriving there, right away comes back. When they have gone there and come back, you ask them about the route, about the matter of going to the village of Naḷakāra, and coming back from it. Would that person hesitate and be unable to reply? The young brahmin Suka replied to the World-honored One, “No, Gotama.” The World-honored One said: Young brahmin, it might be that that person who has gone to the village of Naḷakāra and come back, on being asked about the route, would hesitate and be unable to reply. But if a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awak- ened, is asked about the path to Brahmā, it is impossible that [the tathāgata] would hesitate even for a moment and be unable to reply. The young brahmin Suka said to the World-honored One: Renunciant Gotama, you are free from attachment and revered by the _deva_ s. You are accomplished in this matter. Therefore, on being asked about the path to Brahmā you are able to reply promptly. World-honored One, I have understood. Well-gone One, I have comprehended. World- honored One, from now on I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth until the end of life, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life.^209 Thus said the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the young brahmin Suka was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma152-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA170]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN1.12]], [[]], [[SNP1.2]], [[PE2]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.15]], [[AN4.178]], [[MA27]], [[MN135]], [[MN27]], [[MN95]], [[MN97]], [[SN3.17]], [[SN41.10]], [[SN41.7]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA152]]
> ◄  [[ma151-bdk]] 📜  [[ma153-bdk]] ►
