---
sutta_code: "MA168"
sutta_title:
  - "意行 "
  - "Mental Practice"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA168]]
> ◄  [[ma167-bdk]] 📜  [[ma169-bdk]] ►

### 168. The Discourse on Mental Practice

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.

At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks: I shall now teach you the Dharma that is sublime in the beginning, sublime in the middle, and also sublime in the end, with its meaning and phrasing endowed with purity and revealing the holy life. Called the “Discourse on an Analysis of Mental Practice,” it is on rebirth according to mental practice. Listen closely. Listen closely and pay proper attention. Then the monks listened to receive the instruction. The Buddha said: What is rebirth according to mental practice? Suppose that a monk, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and hap piness born of seclusion, dwells having attained the first absorption. He delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it. Since he delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is estab lished in it, it is certainly possible that, delighting in it and being established in it, he will at death be reborn among the Brahmā deva s. The Brahmā deva s, who are born there and established there, experience rapture and happiness born of seclusion, [just] as a monk here who becomes established on entering the first absorption experiences rapture and hap piness born of seclusion. These two [instances of] rapture and happiness born of seclusion are not different; the two are completely equal. Why is that? [Because] one who first practices this state of samādhi here will later be reborn there. He develops this state of samādhi like this, practices it like this, extends it like this. Such is rebirth among the Brahmā deva s; it is rebirth according to mental practice. Again, with the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] con templation, with inner stillness and mental unification, without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of samādhi, a monk dwells having attained the second absorption. He delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it. Since he delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is estab lished in it, it is certainly possible that, delighting in it and being established in it, he will at death be reborn among the deva s of Streaming Radiance ( ābhassarā-devā ).

The _deva_ s of Streaming Radiance, who are born there and established there, experience rapture and happiness born of samādhi, [just] as a monk here who becomes established on entering the second absorption experiences rapture and happiness born of samādhi. These two [instances of] rapture and happiness born of samādhi are not different; the two are completely equal. Why is that? [Because] one who first prac- tices this state of samādhi here will later be reborn there. He develops this state of samādhi like this, practices it like this, extends it like this. Such is rebirth among the _deva_ s of Streaming Radiance; it is rebirth according to mental practice. Again, secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling in equanimity, not seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, experiencing happiness with the body, a monk dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mindfulness, a happy abode. He delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it. Since he delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is estab- lished in it, it is certainly possible that, delighting in it and being established in it, he will at death be reborn among the _deva_ s of Refulgent Glory ( _subha - kiṇṇā-devā_ ). The _deva_ s of Refulgent Glory, who are born there and established there, experience happiness free from rapture, [just] as a monk here who becomes established on entering the third absorption experiences happiness free from rapture. These two [instances of] happiness free from rapture are not different; the two are completely equal. Why is that? [Because] one who first practices this state of samādhi here will later be reborn there. He develops this state of samādhi like this, practices it like this, extends it like this. Such is rebirth among the _devas_ of Refulgent Glory; it is rebirth according to mental practice. Again, with the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of joy and displeasure, with neither-pain-nor- pleasure, with equanimity, mindfulness, and purity, a monk dwells, having attained the fourth absorption. He delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it.

Since he delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is estab lished in it, it is certainly possible that, delighting in it and being established in it, he will at death be reborn among the deva s of Great Reward ( ve happha lā-devā ). The deva s of Great Reward who are born there and established there experience equanimity, mindfulness, and the happiness of purity, [just] as a monk here who becomes established on entering the fourth absorption experiences equanimity, mindfulness, and the happiness of purity. These two [instances of] equanimity, mindfulness, and happiness of purity are not different; the two are completely equal. Why is that? [Because] one who first practices this state of samādhi here will later be reborn there. He develops this state of samādhi like this, practices it like this, extends it like this. Such is rebirth among the deva s of Great Reward; it is rebirth according to mental practice. Again, by completely transcending perceptions of form, with the ces sation of perceptions of sensory impact, not aware of perceptions of diver sity, [aware] of infinite space, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of infinite space. He delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it. Since he delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it, it is certainly possible that, delighting in it and being established in it, he will at death be reborn among the deva s of the sphere of infinite space. The deva s of the sphere of infinite space, who are born there and estab lished there, experience the perception of the sphere of infinite space, [just] as a monk here who is established in the sphere of infinite space experiences the perception of it. These two [instances of] the perception of the sphere of infinite space are not different; the two are completely equal. Why is that? [Because] one who first practices samādhi here will later be reborn there. He develops this state of samādhi like this, practices it like this, extends it like this. Such is rebirth among the deva s of the sphere of infinite space; it is rebirth according to mental practice. Again, by transcending the sphere of infinite space, [aware] of infinite consciousness, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of infinite con sciousness. He delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it.

Since he delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is estab- lished in it, it is certainly possible that, delighting in it and being established in it, he will at death be reborn among the _deva_ s of the sphere of infinite consciousness. The _deva_ s of the sphere of infinite consciousness, who are born there and established there, experience the perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness, [just] as a monk here who is established in the sphere of infinite consciousness experiences the perception of it. These two [instances of] the perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness are not different; the two are completely equal. Why is that? [Because] one who first prac- tices this state of samādhi here will later be reborn there. He develops that state of samādhi like this, practices it like this, extends it like this. Such is rebirth among the _deva_ s of the sphere of infinite consciousness; it is rebirth according to mental practice. Again, by transcending the sphere of infinite consciousness, [aware] that “there is nothing,” a monk dwells having attained the sphere of nothingness. He delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it. Since he delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it, it is certainly possible that, delighting in it and being established in it, he will at death be reborn among the _deva_ s of the sphere of nothingness. The _deva_ s of the sphere of nothingness, who are born there and estab- lished there, experience the perception of the sphere of nothingness, [just] as a monk here who is established in the sphere of nothingness experiences the perception of it. These two [instances of] the perception of the sphere of nothingness are not different; the two are completely equal. Why is that? [Because] one who first practices this state of samādhi here will later be reborn there. He develops that state of samādhi like this, practices it like this, extends it like this. Such is rebirth among the _deva_ s of the sphere of nothingness; it is rebirth according to mental practice. Again, by completely transcending the perception of the sphere of noth- ingness, [aware] of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception. He delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is established in it. Since he delights in this state of samādhi, desires it, and is estab- lished in it, it is certainly possible that, delighting in it and being established

in it, he will at death be reborn among the deva s of the sphere of neither perception-nor-nonperception. The deva s of the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, who are born there and established there, experience the perception of the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, [just as] a monk here who is estab lished in the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception experiences the perception of it. These two [instances of] the perception of it are not different; the two are completely equal. Why is that? [Because] one who first practices this state of samādhi here will later be reborn there. He develops that state of samādhi like this, practices it like this, extends it like this. Such is rebirth among the deva s of the sphere of neither-percep tion-nor-nonperception; it is rebirth according to mental practice. Again, by completely transcending the perception of the sphere of nei ther-perception-nor-nonperception, a monk dwells knowing cessation. Having directly experienced it, by seeing with wisdom all his taints are destroyed and he has knowledge of their elimination. Among all these states of samādhi, this one is reckoned supreme, the greatest, the highest, the best, the most excellent. It is just as from the cow comes milk, from milk comes cream, from cream comes butter, from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee; and [among these] cream of ghee is reckoned supreme, the great est, the highest, the best, the most excellent. In the same way, among all these states of samādhis, this one is reckoned supreme, the greatest, the highest, the best, the most excellent. Having attained this state of samādhi, being based on this state of samādhi, having become established in this state of samādhi, one will no longer experience the dukkha of birth, old age, disease, and death. This is reckoned as the end of dukkha. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, those monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma168-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA18]], [[PLI-TV-KD6]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA168]]
> ◄  [[ma167-bdk]] 📜  [[ma169-bdk]] ►
