---
sutta_code: "MA162"
sutta_title:
  - "分別六界 "
  - "Analysis of the 6 Elements"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA162]]
> ◄  [[ma161-bdk]] 📜  [[ma163-bdk]] ►

### 162. The Discourse on an Analysis of the Six Elements . On Basic Analysis of the Six Elements

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha, who was dwelling in the country of Magadha, approached Rājagaha to stay overnight. Then the World-honored One approached the house of a potter and said to the potter, “I would like to stay the night in your pottery. Will you give permission?” The potter replied, “I have no objection. However, there is a monk who came first and is already staying there. If he gives permission, then you may stay as you wish.” At that time the venerable Pukkusāti was already staying in that pottery. So the World-honored One went out of the potter’s house, entered the pottery, and said to the venerable Pukkusāti, “Monk, I would like to stay the night in the pottery. Will you give permission?” The venerable Pukkusāti replied, “Sir, I have no objection. Furthermore, in this pottery there are straw seats already set out. Sir, if you wish to stay, you may do as you wish.” Then the World-honored One went out of the pottery, washed his feet, and came back inside. He spread his sitting mat on a straw seat, sat down cross-legged, and spent the night in silence, seated in meditation with a con- centrated mind. The venerable Pukkusāti also spent the night in silence, seated in meditation with a collected mind. Then the World-honored One thought, “It is marvelous and wonderful how this monk stays tranquil and quiet. Let me ask him this: ‘Monk, who is your teacher? In dependence on whom have you gone forth to train in the path, having accepted his Dharma?”’ Having thought this, the World-honored One asked, “Monk, who is your teacher? In dependence on whom have you gone forth to train in the path, having accepted his Dharma?”

The venerable Pukkusāti replied: Venerable friend, there is the renunciant Gotama from the Sakyan lineage who left the Sakyan clan, shaved off hair and beard, donned the yellow robes, and out of faith left the household life and became homeless to train in the path. He has realized the unsurpassable right and total awak- ening. He is my teacher. In dependence on him I have gone forth to train in the path, having accepted his Dharma. The World-honored One asked further, “Monk, have you ever seen your teacher?”^314 The venerable Pukkusāti replied, “I have not seen him.” The World-honored One asked further, “If you saw your teacher, would you recognize him?” The venerable Pukkusāti replied: I would not recognize him. However, venerable friend, I have heard that the World-honored One is a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awak- ened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, leader on the path of Dharma, teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one. He is my teacher. In dependence on him I have gone forth to train in the path, having accepted his Dharma. Then, the World-honored One thought, “This clansman has gone forth to train in the path in dependence on me, having accepted my Dharma. Let me now teach him the Dharma!” Having thought this, the World-honored One said to the venerable Pukkusāti:

Monk, I will teach you the Dharma that is sublime in the beginning, sub lime in the middle, and also sublime in the end, with its meaning and phrasing, endowed with purity, to reveal the holy life,^315 namely the analysis of the six elements. You should listen closely and pay proper attention. The venerable Pukkusāti replied, “Yes indeed.” The Buddha said to him:

Monk, a human being is composed of six elements, has six spheres of contact, and has eighteen mental activities. He [also] has four spheres of stability, and if he is established in them, he does not experience distressing objects. Not experiencing distressing objects, his mind does not give rise to dislike, sadness, worry, or agitation.^316 Such is the instruction: do not neglect wisdom, protect the truth, and cultivate relinquishment. Monk, one should train for the supreme, one should train to attain qui- etude, by analyzing the six elements in this way. Monk, “a human being is composed of six elements”—for what reason has this been said? It refers to the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element, and the consciousness element. Monk—for this reason it has been said: “a human being is composed of six elements.” Monk, “a human being has six spheres of contact”—for what reason has this been said? This means, monk, that through eye contact one sees forms, through ear contact one hears sounds, through nose contact one smells odors, through tongue contact one tastes flavors, through body contact one experiences tangibles, and through mind contact one cognizes mind objects.^317 Monk, for this reason it has been said, “a human being has six spheres of contact.” Monk, “a human being has eighteen mental activities”—for what reason has this been said? It means, monk, that on seeing a form with the eye, one observes that form and abides in joy, [or] one observes that form and abides in sadness, [or] one observes that form and abides in equanimity. In the same way, with the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... on cog- nizing a mental object with the mind, one observes that mental object and abides in joy, [or] one observes that mental object and abides in sadness, [or] one observes that mental object and abides in equanimity. Monk, these six observed with joy, six observed with sadness, and six observed with equanimity together become eighteen activities. Monk, for this reason it has been said: “a human being has eighteen mental activities.” Monk, “a human being has four spheres of stability”—for what reason has this been said? It refers to the sphere of stability in truth, the sphere of stability in wisdom, the sphere of stability in relinquishment, and the sphere of stability in appeasement. Monk, for this reason it has been said: “a human being has four spheres of stability.”

How does a monk not neglect wisdom? Suppose that a monk discerns in relation to the bodily elements: “in this present body of mine there is the internal earth element, which was received at birth.” And what is it? It is this: head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, rough and smooth epidermis, skin, flesh, bones, sinews, kidneys, heart, liver, lungs, spleen, large intestine, stomach, and feces—whatever is of this nature; and whatever else is found in this body internally, whatever is contained in it internally that is solid, that is of a solid nature and found internally, having been received at birth—this, monk, is what is meant by the internal earth element. Monk, whatever is the internal earth element and whatever is the exter nal earth element, all of that is collectively called the earth element. All of it is not mine, I am not that, and it is not my self. On wisely contem plating it like this, knowing it as it really is, the mind does not become defiled with attachment in regard to this earth element. This, monk, is what is meant by not neglecting wisdom. Again, monk, a monk does not neglect wisdom if he discerns in relation to the bodily elements: “in this present body of mine there is the internal water element, which was received at birth.” And what is it? It is this: brain fluid,^318 tears, sweat, mucus, saliva, pus, blood, fat, marrow, phlegm, bile, and urine—whatever is of this nature; and whatever else is found in this body internally, whatever is contained in it internally that is watery, that is of a watery nature and moist internally, having been received at birth—this, monk, is what is meant by the internal water element. Monk, whatever is the internal water element and whatever is the exter nal water element, all of that is collectively called the water element. All of that is not mine, I am not that, and it is not my self. On wisely contem plating it like this, knowing it as it really is, the mind does not become defiled with attachment in regard to the water element. This, monk, is what is meant by not neglecting wisdom. Again, monk, a monk does not neglect wisdom if he discerns in relation to the bodily elements: “in this present body of mine there is the internal fire element, which was received at birth.” And what is it? It is this: bodily heat, bodily warmth, bodily discomfort, warmth from bodily nourishment, that is, from digesting food and drink—whatever is of this nature; and what ever else is found in this body internally, whatever is contained in it internally

that is fiery, that is of a fiery nature and hot internally, having been received at birth—this, monk, is what is meant by the internal fire element. Monk, whatever is the internal fire element and whatever is the external fire element, all of that is collectively called the fire element. All of that is not mine, I am not that, and it is not my self. On wisely contemplating it like this, knowing it as it really is, the mind does not become defiled with attachment in regard to the fire element. This, monk, is what is meant by not neglecting wisdom. Again, monk, a monk does not neglect wisdom if he discerns in relation to the bodily elements: “in this present body of mine there is the internal wind element, which was received at birth.” And what is it? It is this: upward-moving winds, downward-moving winds, forceful winds, pulling and contracting winds, disturbing winds, irregular winds, winds in the joints, the winds of out-breaths, and the winds of in-breaths—whatever is of this nature; and whatever else is found in this body internally, whatever is contained in it internally that is windy, that is of a windy nature and moves internally, having been received at birth—this, monk, is what is meant by the internal wind element. Monk, whatever is the internal wind element and whatever is the exter- nal wind element, all of that is collectively called the wind element. All of that is not mine, I am not that, and it is not my self. On wisely contem- plating it like this, knowing it as it really is, the mind does not become defiled with attachment in regard to the wind element. This, monk, is what is meant by not neglecting wisdom. Again, monk, a monk does not neglect wisdom if he discerns in relation to the bodily elements: “in this present body of mine there is the internal space element, which was received at birth.” And what is it? It is the space for the eyes, the space in the ears, the space in the nostrils, the space in the mouth, the throat, and so on, through which [food] can pass; it is where food is chewed, held, dissolved, slowly passed through the throat, retained [for a while], and [eventually] discharged below—whatever is of this nature; and whatever else is found in this body internally, whatever is contained in it internally that is space-like, whatever is found to be space- like, not covered by flesh, skin, bone, or tendons—this, monk, is what is meant by the internal space element.

Monk, whatever is the internal space element and whatever is the exter nal space element, all of that is collectively called the space element. All of that is not mine, I am not that, and it is not my self. On wisely contem plating it like this, knowing it as it really is, the mind does not become defiled with attachment in regard to the space element. This, monk, is what is meant by not neglecting wisdom. Monk, if a monk knows these five elements as they truly are, having known them as they truly are, his mind is not defiled by them but liberated from them. There then remains just consciousness. Consciousness of what? Con sciousness of pleasure, consciousness of pain, consciousness of mental joy, consciousness of mental sadness, consciousness of equanimity.^319 Monk, because of pleasant contact there arises pleasant feeling; he feels a pleasant feeling. On feeling a pleasant feeling, he knows he is feeling a pleasant feeling. If for the monk this pleasant contact ceases, then once the pleasant contact has ceased, the pleasant feeling that had arisen from the pleasant contact also ceases and comes to an end; he knows it has become cool. Monk, because of painful contact there arises painful feeling; he feels a painful feeling. On feeling a painful feeling, he knows he is feeling a painful feeling. If for the monk this painful contact ceases, then once the painful contact has ceased, the painful feeling that had arisen from the painful contact also ceases and comes to an end; he knows it has become cool. Monk, because of mentally joyful contact there arises mentally joyful feel ing; he feels a mentally joyful feeling. On feeling a mentally joyful feeling, he knows he is feeling a mentally joyful feeling. If for the monk this mentally joyful contact ceases, then once the mentally joyful contact has ceased, the mentally joyful feeling that had arisen from the mentally joyful contact also ceases and comes to an end; he knows it has become cool. Monk, because of mentally sad contact there arises mentally sad feeling; he feels a mentally sad feeling. Having felt a mentally sad feeling, he knows he is feeling a mentally sad feeling. If for the monk this mentally sad contact ceases, then once the mentally sad contact has ceased, the mentally sad feeling that had arisen from the mentally sad contact also ceases and comes to an end; he knows it has become cool.

Monk, because of equanimous contact there arises equanimous feeling; he feels an equanimous feeling. On feeling an equanimous feeling, he knows he is feeling an equanimous feeling. If for the monk this equanimous contact ceases, then once the equanimous contact has ceased, the equani- mous feeling that had arisen from the equanimous contact also ceases and comes to an end; he knows it has become cool. Monk, because of this or that contact there arises this or that feeling; and once this or that contact has ceased, this or that feeling also ceases. He knows that this feeling comes from contact, has its root in contact, arises by way of contact, is born from contact, has contact as its beginning, and proceeds in dependence on contact. Monk, it is just as, conditioned by a lower firestick, an upper firestick, and human effort, heat is produced and fire arises; but, monk, if the many pieces of firewood are scattered, then any fire that arises from those [fire- sticks]—fire that might have produced much heat if provided with much fuel—will all cease and come to an end, leaving just cold firewood. In the same way, monk, because of this or that contact there arises this or that feeling. Once this or that contact has ceased, this or that feeling also ceases. He knows that this feeling comes from contact, has its root in contact, arises by way of contact, is born from contact, has contact as its beginning, and proceeds in dependence on contact. If a monk is not defiled by these three feelings but is liberated from them, then that monk just dwells in equanimity which is extremely pure. Monk, that monk reflects, “With this pure equanimity of mine, let me enter the sphere of infinite space, developing the mind accordingly, in dependence on that, dwelling in that, established on that, conditioned by that, bound to that. With this pure equanimity of mine, let me enter the sphere of infinite consciousness... the sphere of nothingness... the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, developing the mind accordingly, in dependence on that, dwelling in that, established on that, conditioned by that, bound to that.” Monk, he is just like a skilled goldsmith who uses fire to refine gold, forging it so that it becomes extremely thin, heating it in the furnace in various ways so that it becomes pure, extremely malleable, and bright.

Monk, once that gold has been heated and refined in various ways by the goldsmith so that it becomes pure, extremely malleable, and bright, that goldsmith fashions it according to his will into [gold thread for] embroidery to adorn a new garment, or into a finger ring, an arm bracelet, a necklace, or a jeweled hair ornament. In the same way, monk, that monk reflects, “With this pure equanimity of mine, I could enter the sphere of infinite space, and develop this mental state in dependence on that, dwelling in that, established on that, conditioned by that, bound to that. With this pure equanimity of mine, I could enter the sphere of infinite consciousness... the sphere of nothingness... the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, and develop this mental state in dependence on that, dwelling in that, established on that, conditioned by that, bound to that.” That monk reflects further, “If this pure equanimity of mine were dependent on the sphere of infinite space, then it would be conditioned. What is conditioned, that is impermanent. What is impermanent, that is dukkha. What is dukkha, I know as dukkha. ” Having known it as dukkha, he lets go of it and does not enter the sphere of infinite space. [He reflects,] “If this pure equanimity of mine were based on the sphere of infinite consciousness... the sphere of nothingness... the sphere of nei ther-perception-nor-nonperception, then it would be conditioned. What is conditioned, that is impermanent. What is impermanent, that is dukkha. What is dukkha, I know as dukkha. ” Having known it as dukkha , he lets go of it and does not enter the sphere of infinite consciousness... the sphere of noth ingness... the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception.^320 Monk, if a monk, by wisely contemplating these four spheres, knows them as they truly are, then his mind does not [wish to] attain them and does not enter them. At that time he is no longer conditioned and has no intentions in regard to becoming or nonbecoming. When he experiences the last feeling to be experienced by the body,^321 he will know that he is experiencing the last feeling to be experienced by the body. When he experiences the last feeling to be experienced in his life, he will know that he is experiencing the last feeling to be experienced in his life. He knows that with the breaking up of the body at the end of life, when the life span has been completed, all feelings completely cease and come to an end, becoming cool.

Monk, it is just like a lamp that burns in dependence on oil and a wick. If nobody adds oil and supplies a wick, then once what had earlier [been supplied] comes to an end, the lamp does not continue [burning], having no more fuel. In the same way, when the monk experiences the last feeling to be expe- rienced by the body, he will know that he is experiencing the last feeling to be experienced by the body. When he experiences the last feeling to be experienced in his life, he will know that he is experiencing the last feeling to be experienced in his life. With the breaking up of the body at the end of life, when the life span has been completed, all feelings completely cease and come to an end. He knows that they have become cool. Monk, this is reckoned the foremost right wisdom for a monk, namely attaining supreme and complete cessation. A monk whose taints are destroyed has attained this; he has attained the foremost sphere of right wisdom. Monk, with this liberation he is established in truth and has attained imperturbability. Truth is what is in accordance with the Dharma. Falsehood is what has the nature of delusion. Monk, to attain that is the foremost sphere of truth. Monk, suppose that a monk is practicing relinquishment.^322 Whereas he formerly would certainly have harbored resentment, he has now let go of that, vomited it out, become liberated from it, extinguished it completely. Monk, this is reckoned a monk’s foremost right relinquishment, namely the complete giving up of worldliness, its fading away, ceasing, and coming to an end. A monk who achieves this achieves the foremost sphere of relinquishment. Monk, that monk’s mind [formerly] was defiled by sensual desire, ill will, and stupidity, for he had not attained liberation. Monk, when all sen- sual passion, anger, and stupidity end, [when they] fade away, cease, come to an end, that is to attain the foremost peace. Monk, one who achieves that achieves the foremost sphere of peace. Monk, “I am” elevates oneself. “I shall be” also elevates oneself. “I shall neither be nor not be” also elevates oneself. “I shall be endowed with form” also elevates oneself. “I shall be formless” also elevates oneself. “I shall be neither endowed with form nor formless” also elevates oneself. “I shall be percipient” also elevates oneself. “I shall be nonpercipient” also

elevates oneself. “I shall be neither percipient nor non-percipient” also ele vates oneself. This is conceit; this is pride; this is negligence.^323 Monk, if there is none of this self-elevation, conceit, pride, or negli gence, then the mind is reckoned to be at peace. Monk, if the mind is at peace, then it does not dislike, is not sad, is not troubled, not agitated.^324 Why is that? Because that monk has attained Dharma, there is no longer what could be called dislike. Not disliking, he is not sad; not being sad, he is not worried; not being worried, he is not troubled; not being troubled, he is not agitated; and because of not being agitated he attains nirvana, knowing as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will be not be another experi encing of existence.” As this Dharma was being taught, there arose in the venerable Pukkusāti the spotless, immaculate Dharma eye in regard to all phenomena.^325 Then the venerable Pukkusāti saw the Dharma, attained the Dharma, realized the bright pure Dharma; he abandoned doubt and went beyond perplexity; he became independent of other teachers; he would never again follow others; and he became free of hesitation. Having been established in the attainment of the fruit, he had attained fearlessness in the Dharma taught by the World honored One. He rose from his seat, paid homage at the feet of the Buddha, and said, World-honored One, I repent. Well-gone One, I confess. [I was] like a fool, like an ignorant [person], like an uncertain [person], like one who does not understand well and does not recognize good ground, unable to under stand on my own. Why is that? Because I addressed the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, as “sir.” May the World-honored One accept my repentance. Having repented, I will not do it again. The World-honored One said: Monk, you truly were foolish and ignorant, you truly were uncertain. You did not understand well in that you addressed the Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, as “sir.” Monk, if you are able to repent on your own, having seen it and disclosed it, and you guard against doing it again, then, monk, in this way there is benefit and no loss in the noble

Dharma and discipline; that is to say, when one is able to repent on one’s own, having seen it and disclosed it, and guards against doing it again.^326 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Pukkusāti was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma162-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DHP\|DHP186-187]], [[JA258]], [[SN4.20]], [[PE1]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DA13]], [[DA2]], [[DN15]], [[MA163]], [[MN106]], [[MN137]], [[SN12]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA162]]
> ◄  [[ma161-bdk]] 📜  [[ma163-bdk]] ►
