---
sutta_code: "MA169"
sutta_title:
  - "拘樓瘦無諍 "
  - "Kurus on Nonconflict"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA169]]
> ◄  [[ma168-bdk]] 📜  [[ma170-bdk]] ►

### 169. The Discourse [Spoken among] the Kurus on Nonconflict

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling among the Bhaggās,^368 staying at Kammāsadhamma, a Kuru town.

At that time the World-honored One told the monks:

I shall teach you the Dharma that is sublime in the beginning, sublime in the middle, and also sublime in the end, with its meaning and phrasing, endowed with purity, and revealing the holy life.^369 It is called the “Dis- course on Analysis of Nonconflict.” Listen closely. Listen closely and pay proper attention.

Then the monks listened to receive the teaching. The Buddha said:

Do not seek sensual pleasure, which is an extremely degrading activity engaged in by ordinary worldlings; also do not seek self-mortification, which leads to suffering, is not the practice of noble ones, and is not con- nected to what is beneficial. Avoiding these two extremes is the middle way for attaining vision, for attaining knowledge, for naturally attaining stillness, which leads to knowledge, to awakening, to nirvana. There is praising, there is blaming, and there is neither-praising-nor- blaming, which is teaching the Dharma. Be committed to evenness and, having commitment and understanding, constantly seek happiness within. Do not speak in an insinuating manner and also do not praise [someone] to [their] face. Speak in an even and restrained manner; do not speak in an uneven and unrestrained manner.^370 Follow local customs, neither insisting on them nor rejecting them. This is the subject matter of this “Discourse on an Analysis of Nonconflict.” “Do not seek sensual pleasures, which is an extremely degrading activity engaged in by ordinary worldlings; but also do not seek self-mortification, which leads to suffering, is not a practice of noble ones and is not connected to what is beneficial”—why was this said? “Do not seek sensual pleasures, which is an extremely degrading activity engaged in by ordinary worldlings”—this describes one extreme; “also do not seek self-mortification, which leads to suffering, is not a practice of noble ones, and is not connected to what is beneficial”—this describes the second extreme.^371 “Do not seek sensual pleasures, which is an extremely degrading activity engaged in by ordinary worldlings; and also do not seek self-mortification,

which leads to suffering, is not a practice of noble ones, and is not con nected to what is beneficial”—this has been said for this reason. “Avoiding these two extremes is the middle way for attaining vision, for attaining knowledge, for naturally attaining stillness, which leads to knowledge, to awakening, to nirvana”—why has this been said? There is this noble eightfold path: right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. “Avoiding these two extremes is the middle way for attaining vision, for attaining knowledge, for naturally attaining stillness, which leads to knowledge, to awakening, to nirvana”—this has been said for this reason. “There is praising, there is blaming, and there is neither praising nor blaming, which is teaching the Dharma”—why has this been said? What is praising? What is blaming and [what is] not teaching the Dharma? [Seeking] joy and happiness connected with sensual pleasure is an extremely degrading activity engaged in by ordinary worldlings. It is a state beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. Having come to know this, one blames [such practitioners] personally. Why is that? [One thinks,] “Sensual pleasures are impermanent, dukkha, of a nature to wear away.” Knowing that sensual pleasures are impermanent, [one thinks,] “Therefore those [who engage in them] are entirely beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; such people are practicing wrongly.” Having come to know this, one therefore blames them personally. Self-mortification which leads to suffering is not a practice of noble ones and is not connected to what is beneficial. It is a state beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. Having come to know this, one blames personally [those who practice it]. Why is that? [One thinks,] “Those renunciants and brahmins, through fear of dukkha, shave off hair and beard, don yellow robes, and out of faith leave the household life and become homeless to train in the path. Yet those renunciants and brahmins embrace this dukkha, and therefore they are entirely beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; they are practicing wrongly.” Having come to know this, one therefore blames them personally. The presence of fetters that have not been eradicated is a state beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. Having come to know this, one blames [such practitioners] personally. Why is

that? [One thinks,] “Those who have not eradicated the fetters, have not eradicated becoming. Therefore they are entirely beset by suffering, vex- ation, trouble, and sadness; they are practicing wrongly.” Having come to know this, one therefore blames them personally. The eradication of fetters is a state that is not beset by suffering, vex- ation, trouble, and sadness; it is right practice. Having come to know this, one praises [such practitioners] personally. Why is that? [One thinks,] “Those who have eradicated the fetters, have eradicated becoming. There- fore, they are entirely free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; they are practicing rightly.” Having come to know this, one therefore praises them personally. Not seeking happiness within is a state beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice.^372 Having come to know this, one blames [such practitioners] personally. Why is that? [One thinks,] “Those who do not seek happiness within are not inner seekers. Therefore, they are entirely beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; they are practicing wrongly.” Having come to know this, one therefore blames them personally. Seeking happiness within is a state not beset by suffering, vexation, trou- ble, and sadness; it is right practice. Having come to know this, one praises [such practitioners] personally. Why is that? [One thinks,] “Those who seek happiness within are inner seekers. Therefore, they are entirely free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; they are practicing rightly.” Having come to know this, one therefore praises them personally. In these ways, there is praising, and there is blaming, but no teaching of the Dharma. Neither praising them nor blaming them, one [should instead] teach them the Dharma. How does one neither praise nor blame, but [instead] teach the Dharma? [Seeking] joy and happiness connected with sensual pleasure is an extremely degrading activity engaged in by ordinary worldlings. It is a state beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. Having come to know this, one teaches [such people] the Dharma. Why is that? One does not say, “Sensual pleasures are impermanent, _dukkha,_ of a nature to wear away. Knowing that sensual pleasures are impermanent, therefore those [who engage in them] are entirely beset by suffering, vexation,

trouble, and sadness; such people are practicing wrongly.” This method will not be successful. [Instead, one says,] there exists the state of being beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; this is wrong practice.” Having come to know this, one teaches the Dharma. Self-mortification, which leads to dukkha, is not a practice of noble ones and is not connected to what is beneficial. It is a state beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. Having come to know this, one teaches [such people] the Dharma. Why is that? One does not say, “Self-mortification which leads to dukkha is not a practice of noble ones and is not connected to what is beneficial. It is a state beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice.” This method will not be successful. [Instead, one says,] there exists just the state of being beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; this is wrong practice.” Having come to know this, for this reason one teaches the Dharma. The presence of fetters that have not been eradicated is a state beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. Having come to know this, one teaches the Dharma. Why is that? One does not say, “Those who have not eradicated the fetters have not eradicated becom ing. Therefore they are entirely beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; they are practicing wrongly.” This method will not be successful. [Instead, one says,] there exists just the state of being beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; this is wrong practice.” Having come to know this, for this reason one teaches the Dharma. The eradication of fetters is a state that is not beset by suffering, vex ation, trouble, and sadness; it is right practice. Having come to know this, one teaches the Dharma. Why is that? One does not say, “Those who have eradicated the fetters have eradicated becoming. Therefore, they are entirely free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; they are practicing rightly.” This method will not be successful. [Instead, one says,] there exists just the state of not being beset by suffering, of no vexation, no trouble, and no sadness; this is right practice.” Having come to know this, for this reason one teaches the Dharma. Not seeking happiness within is a state beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. Having come to know this, one

teaches the Dharma. Why is that? One does not say, “Those who do not seek happiness within are not inner seekers. Therefore, they are entirely beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; they are practicing wrongly.” This method will not be successful. [Instead, one says,] there exists just the state of being beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sad- ness; this is wrong practice.” Having come to know this, for this reason one teaches the Dharma. Seeking happiness within is a state not beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is right practice. Having come to know this, one teaches the Dharma. Why is that? One does not say, “Those who seek happiness within are inner seekers. Therefore, they are entirely free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; they are practicing rightly.” This method will not be successful. [Instead, one says,] there exists just the state of not being beset by suffering, of no vexation, no trouble, and no sadness; this is right practice.” Having come to know this, for this reason one teaches the Dharma. In this way there is neither praising nor blaming, but [instead] teaching of the Dharma. “There is praising, there is blaming, and there is neither praising nor blaming, which is teaching the Dharma”—this has been said for this reason. “Be committed to evenness and, having commitment and understanding, constantly seek happiness within”—why has this been said? There is hap- piness that is ignoble happiness, the happiness of the ordinary worldling, which is basically a disease, basically a carbuncle, basically an arrow or a thorn, which pertains to what is worldly ( _sāmisa_ ), which pertains to birth and death, which should not be cultivated, should not be practiced, should not be made much of. This, I say, should not be cultivated. There is a happiness that is noble happiness, the happiness of dispassion, the happiness of separation, the happiness of appeasement, the happiness [leading to] full awakening, which does not pertain to what is worldly, does not pertain to birth and death, which should be cultivated, should be practiced, should be made much of. This, I say, should be cultivated. What is the happiness that is ignoble happiness, the happiness of the ordinary worldling, which is basically a disease, basically a carbuncle,

basically an arrow or a thorn, which pertains to what is worldly, pertains to birth and death, which should not be cultivated, should not be practiced, should not be made much of, of which I say that it should not be cultivated? It is the pleasure and happiness that arise in dependence on the five strands of sensual pleasure. This happiness is ignoble happiness, the happiness of the ordinary worldling, which is basically a disease, basically a carbuncle, basically an arrow or thorn, which pertains to what is worldly, pertains to birth and death, which should not be cultivated, should not be practiced, should not be made much of, of which I say that it should not be cultivated. What is the happiness that is noble happiness, the happiness of dispas sion, the happiness of separation, the happiness of appeasement, the hap piness [leading to] full awakening, which does not pertain to what is worldly, does not pertain to birth and death, which should be cultivated, should be practiced, should be made much of, of which I say that it should be cultivated? If a monk, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states... up to... dwells having attained the fourth absorp tion. This happiness is noble happiness, the happiness of dispassion, the happiness of separation, the happiness of appeasement, the happiness of right awakening, which does not pertain to what is worldly, does not pertain to birth and death, which should be cultivated, should be practiced, should be made much of, of which I say that it should be cultivated. “Be committed to evenness and, having commitment and understanding, constantly seeks happiness within”—this has been said for this reason. “Do not speak in an insinuating manner, and do not praise [someone] to [their] face”^373 —why has this been said? There is insinuating speech that is untrue, false, and not connected to what is beneficial; there is insin uating speech that is true, not false, but is not connected to what is ben eficial; and there is insinuating speech that is true, not false, and is con nected to what is beneficial. Herein, if insinuating speech is untrue, false, and not connected to what is beneficial, then it should not be spoken. Herein, if insinuating speech is true, not false, but not connected to what is beneficial, then one should also train in not speaking it. Herein, if insinuating speech is true, not false, and is connected to what is beneficial, then if one knows the time is right,

let it be accomplished with right comprehension and right mindfulness. It is the same with praising [someone] to [their] face. “Do not speak in an insinuating manner, and do not praise [someone] to [their] face”—this has been said for this reason. “Speak evenly and with restraint; do not speak unevenly and without restraint”^374 —why has this been said? With uneven and unrestrained speech the body becomes troubled, mindfulness is lost, the mind becomes very fatigued, and the voice is spoiled and not easily understood. With speech that is even and restrained the body does not become troubled, mindfulness is not lost, the mind does not become very fatigued, the voice is not spoiled, and it is easily understood. “Speak evenly and with restraint; do not speak unevenly and without restraint”—this has been said for this reason. “Follow local customs; do not insist on them and do not reject them”— why has this been said? What is following local customs, [what is] insisting on them, and [what is] rejecting them? Various people in various regions in various ways may speak of a tray, or they may speak of a dish, or they may speak of a platter, or they may speak of a plate, or they may speak of a salver. As various people in various regions in various ways may speak of a tray, or may speak of a dish, or may speak of a platter, or may speak of a plate, or may speak of a salver, each one is strong in always declaring: “This is true; anything else is false.” In this way there is insisting on or rejecting of local customs. What is neither insisting on nor rejecting of local customs? Various people in various regions may, in various ways, speak of a tray, or speak of a dish, or speak of a platter, or speak of a plate, or speak of a salver. As various people in various regions may, in various ways, speak of a tray, or speak of a dish, or speak of a platter, or speak of a plate, or speak of a salver, each one is not strong in always declaring: “This is true; any- thing else is false.” In this way there is neither insisting on nor rejecting of local customs. “Follow local customs; do not insist on them and do not reject them”—this has been said for this reason. There are states with conflict and there are states without conflict. What are states with conflict and what are states without conflict? [Seeking] joy and happiness connected with sensual pleasures, which is an extremely degrading activity engaged in by ordinary worldlings, this is a state with

conflict. Why is it a state with conflict? [Because] this state is beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. For this reason this is a state with conflict. Self-mortification leads to suffering, is an ignoble practice, and is not connected to what is beneficial. This is a state with conflict. Why is it a state with conflict? [Because] it is a state that is beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. For this reason it is a state with conflict. Avoiding these two extremes is the middle way for attaining vision, for attaining knowledge, for naturally attaining stillness, which leads to knowledge, to awakening, to nirvana; this is a state without conflict. Why is it a state without conflict? [Because] it is a state that is free from suf fering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is right practice. For this reason it is a state without conflict. The presence of fetters that have not been eradicated is a state with conflict. Why is it a state with conflict? [Because] it is a state that is beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. For this reason it is a state with conflict. The eradication of fetters is a state without conflict. Why is it a state without conflict? [Because] it is a state that is free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is right practice. For this reason it is a state without conflict. Not seeking happiness within is a state with conflict. Why is it a state with conflict? [Because] it is a state that is beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. For this reason it is a state with conflict. Seeking happiness within is a state without conflict. Why is it a state without conflict? [Because] it is a state that is free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is right practice. For this reason it is a state without conflict. Herein, there is happiness that is ignoble happiness, the happiness of the ordinary worldling, which is basically a disease, basically a carbuncle, basically an arrow or a thorn, which pertains to what is worldly, pertains to birth and death, which should not be cultivated, should not be practiced, should not be made much of, of which I say that it should therefore not be

cultivated; this is a state with conflict. Why is it a state with conflict? [Because] it is a state that is beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sad- ness; it is wrong practice. For this reason it is a state with conflict. Herein, there is happiness that is noble happiness, the happiness of dis- passion, the happiness of separation, the happiness of appeasement, the happiness [leading to] full awakening, which does not pertain to what is worldly, does not pertain to birth and death, which should be cultivated, practiced, and made much of, of which I say that it should therefore be cul- tivated; this is a state without conflict. Why is it a state without conflict? [Because] it is a state that is free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sad- ness; it is right practice. For this reason it is a state without conflict. Herein, insinuating speech that is untrue, false, and not connected to what is beneficial, this is a state with conflict. Why is it a state with conflict? [Because] it is a state that is beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sad- ness; it is wrong practice. For this reason it is a state with conflict. Herein, insinuating speech that is true, not false, but is not connected to what is beneficial, this is a state with conflict. Why is it a state with conflict? [Because] it is a state that is beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. For this reason it is a state with conflict. Herein, insinuating speech that is true, not false, and is connected to what is beneficial, this is a state without conflict. Why is it a state without conflict? [Because] it is a state that is free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is right practice. For this reason it is a state without conflict. Uneven and unrestrained speech is a state with conflict. Why is it a state with conflict? [Because] it is a state that is beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. For this reason it is a state with conflict. Even and restrained speech is a state without conflict. Why is it a state without conflict? [Because] it is a state that is free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is right practice. For this reason it is a state without conflict. Insisting on or rejecting local customs is a state with conflict. Why is it a state with conflict? [Because] it is a state that is beset by suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is wrong practice. For this reason it is a state with conflict.

Neither insisting on nor rejecting local customs is a state without con flict. Why is it a state without conflict? [Because] it is a state free from suffering, vexation, trouble, and sadness; it is right practice. For this reason it is a state without conflict. These are reckoned states with conflict. You should understand states with conflict and states without conflict. Having understood states with conflict and states without conflict, discard states with conflict and cultivate states without conflict. [This is how] you should train. In this way the clansman Subhūti, by following the path of nonconflict, subsequently came to understand the Dharma according to the Dharma. Having known the Dharma as it really is Subhūti spoke this verse: This practice is true emptiness; Equanimity, this is dwelling in appeasement.^375 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted in it and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma169-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA169]]
> ◄  [[ma168-bdk]] 📜  [[ma170-bdk]] ►
