---
sutta_code: "MA16"
sutta_title:
  - "迦藍 "
  - "to the Kālāmas"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA16]]
> ◄  [[ma15-bdk]] 📜  [[ma17-bdk]] ►

### 16. The Discourse to the Kālāmas

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha, who was wandering in the territory of the Kālāmas together with a great company of monks, having arrived at Kesaputta, was staying in a rosewood grove north of Kesaputta. At that time, the Kālāmas of Kesaputta heard that the renunciant Gotama, a son of the Sakyans, who had gone forth from the Sakya clan to train in the path, was wandering in the territory of the Kālāmas together with a great company of monks and, having arrived at Kesaputta, was staying in a rose- wood grove north of Kesaputta. [They also heard that] the renunciant Gotama had a great reputation, which had spread in all the ten directions:

The renunciant Gotama is a Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a Well-gone One, a knower of the world, an unsurpassed one, a trainer of those to be tamed, a teacher of gods and human beings, and known as the Buddha, the Fortunate One. In this world, with its gods, Māras, Brahmās, renunciants, and brah mins, from human beings to gods, he has [attained] understanding and awakening by himself, and dwells having personally realized it. The Dharma he teaches is good in the beginning, good in the middle,and

good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, revealing a holy life endowed with purity. If one visits such a Tathāgata, who is free from attachment and fully awakened, [if one] pays homage to him respectfully and serves him, then one will quickly get good rewards. [They thought:] “We should go together to see the renunciant Gotama and pay homage to him.” Having learned [of the Buddha], the Kālāmas of Kesaputta left Kesaputta, relatives walking in groups together. They went north toward the rosewood grove to visit the World-honored One and pay homage to him. Having approached the Buddha, some of the Kālāmas paid respect with their heads at the Buddha’s feet and sat to one side; some exchanged courteous greetings with the Buddha and sat to one side; some saluted the Buddha with their palms placed together and sat to one side; and some, having seen the Buddha from a distance, sat down silently. When each of the Kālāmas was seated and settled, the Buddha taught them Dharma, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting them. Having, by countless skillful means, taught them Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted them, he remained silent. Then the Kālāmas, having been taught Dharma by the Buddha, having been exhorted, encouraged and delighted, rose from their seats, arranged their clothes so as to bare one shoulder, saluted the Buddha by placing their palms together, and said to the World-honored One: Gotama, some renunciant or brahmin approaches [us] Kālāmas and just praises what he himself has come to know and see, while denounc ing and disparaging what others have come to know and see. And then, Gotama, another renunciant or brahmin approaches [us] Kālāmas and also praises what he himself has come to know and see, while denounc ing and disparaging what others have come to know and see. Gotama, having heard these, we have come to doubt: Which of these renunciants or brahmins is right, and which is wrong? The World-honored One told them:

Kālāmas, do not doubt! Why? When there is doubt, hesitation arises. Kālāmas, you yourselves do not have clear knowledge about whether there is a next life or whether there is no next life. Kālāmas, you your- selves also do not have clear knowledge about what action is an offense and what action is not an offense. Kālāmas, you should know that all actions have three causes, sources, roots, causal conditions. What are the three? Kālāmas, desire is a cause, a source, a root, a causal condition of actions. Kālāmas, hatred and ignorance are causes, sources, roots, causal conditions of actions. Kālāmas, someone who has desire becomes overwhelmed by desire; their mind is never satisfied. Such a one may kill living beings, or take what is not given, or engage in sexual misconduct, or knowingly speak falsehood, or drink intoxicating liquor. Kālāmas, someone who has hatred becomes overwhelmed by hatred; their mind is never satisfied. Such a one may kill living beings, or take what is not given, or engage in sexual misconduct, or knowingly speak falsehood, or drink intoxicating liquor. Kālāmas, someone who is ignorant becomes overwhelmed by ignorance; their mind is never satisfied. Such a one may kill living beings, or take what is not given, or engage in sexual misconduct, or knowingly speak falsehood, or drink intoxicating liquor. Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from killing, gives up killing, discards blade and cudgel. He has shame and scruple, and a mind [full of] loving-kindness and compassion, [wishing to] benefit all [beings], including insects. He purifies his mind with regard to killing living beings. Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from taking what is not given, gives up taking what is not given. He takes [only] what was given and delights in taking [only] what was given. He is always fond of generosity, rejoicing in it, without stinginess, and not expecting a reward. He purifies his mind with regard to taking what is not given. Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from sexual activity, has given up sexual activity. He diligently practices celibacy, is energeticin

this good conduct, pure, without blemish, having abandoned sensual desires, having given up sexual desires. He purifies his mind of sexual activity. Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from false speech, has given up false speech. He speaks the truth, delights in the truth, is unshakably established in the truth, is completely trustworthy, and would not deceive [anyone in] the world. He purifies his mind with regard to false speech. Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from divisive speech and abandons divisive speech. He does not engage in divisive speech and does not harm [the relationships of] others. Hearing something from this person he does not tell it to that person, in order to harm this person; hearing something from that person he does not tell it to this person, in order to harm that person. He has the wish to unite those that are divided, delighting in unity. He does not belong to any faction and does not delight in or praise factions. He has purified his mind with regard to divisive speech. Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from harsh speech, has given up harsh speech. He has given up the type of speech that consists of words that are rough and rude in tone, offensive words that grate on the ear, that people neither enjoy nor desire, that cause others suffering and vexation, and that are not conducive to concen tration. He speaks the type of speech that consists of words that are pure, peaceful, gentle, and beneficial, that are pleasant to the ear and enter the mind, that are enjoyable and desirable, that give others hap piness, words endowed with meaning, that do not make others afraid and that help others to attain samādhi. He purifies his mind with regard to harsh speech. Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from frivolous speech and abandons frivolous speech. He speaks at the [proper] time, speak ing what is true, what is Dharma, what is meaningful, what is calming, delighting in speaking what is calming. [In regard to any] matter he teaches well and admonishes well, in accordance with the [proper] time and in a proper way. He purifies his mind with regard to frivolous speech.

Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from covetousness and abandons covetousness; his mind is not full of envy on seeing another’s wealth and lifestyle, he does not long for them, wishing: “If only I could get that!” He purifies his mind with regard to covetousness. Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from hatred and aban- dons hatred; he has shame and scruple; his mind is full of loving-kind- ness and compassion for the welfare of all beings, including insects. He purifies his mind with regard to hatred. Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple abstains from wrong view and abandons wrong view. He holds right view, view that is not distorted. He has these views and makes these declarations:

There is offering, there is sacrifice, there are incantations; there are wholesome and unwholesome deeds, there are results of whole some or unwholesome deeds; there is this world and the other world, there are father and mother; there are True Persons in the world who are headed for a supreme attainment, who are well gone and well directed, who in this world and another world have [attained] understanding and awakening by themselves, and dwell having personally realized it.

He purifies his mind with regard to wrong view. In this manner, Kālāmas, a learned noble disciple achieves purity of bodily actions, achieves purity of verbal and mental actions. He aban- dons ill will and quarrel, discards sloth and torpor, is without restlessness or conceit, and cuts off doubt; he transcends arrogance, has right mind- fulness and right attentiveness, and is without confusion. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwells pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind] boundless, exalted, immeasurable and well cultivated. It is the same with compassion, empathic joy, and equanimity; free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwells

pervading the entire world [with a mind] boundless, exalted, immeas urable and well cultivated. In this way, Kālāmas, the mind of a learned noble disciple is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel, and he obtains four assurances. What are the four? [He thinks:] [If] there is this world and another world, [if] there are results of wholesome and unwholesome actions, then upholding and being endowed with this right view and action in conformity with it, at the breaking up of the body, after my death, I will certainly go to a good realm of existence, be reborn in a heavenly realm. Thus, Kālāmas, this is the first assurance obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel. Again, Kālāmas, [he thinks:] [If] there is neither this world nor another world, [if] there are no results of wholesome and unwholesome actions, then in this case, in this lifetime I am not censured by others for this belief, but am praised for having right attentiveness, as one who is diligent and one who is said to have right view. Thus, Kālāmas, this is the second assurance obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel. Again, Kālāmas, [he thinks:] Whatever I have done, I have certainly done no evil, and I recollect no evil. Why? Since I have done no evil, whence could suffering arise? Thus, Kālāmas, this is the third assurance obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel. Again, Kālāmas, [he thinks:] Whatever I may have done, I have certainly done no evil, and I have not violated the [customs of the] world, either out of fear or without fear; I have always had compassion and empathy for the

entire world. My mind has been free of contention with beings, untainted, and delighted. Thus, Kālāmas, this is the fourth assurance obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel. These, Kālāmas, are the four assurances obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel.

The Kālāmas[, repeating the teaching,] said to the World-honored One:

Indeed, Gotama, the mind of a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel obtains four assurances. What are the four? [If] there is this world and another world, [if] there are results of wholesome and unwholesome actions, then upholding and being endowed with this right view and with action in conformity with it, at the breaking up of the body, after my death, I will certainly go to a good realm of existence, and be reborn in a heavenly realm. Thus, Gotama, this is the first assurance obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel. Again, Gotama, [If] there is neither this world nor another world, [if] there are no results of wholesome and unwholesome actions, then in this case, in this lifetime, I am not censured by others for this belief, but am praised for having right attentiveness, as one who is diligent and is said to have right view. Thus, Gotama, this is the second assurance obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel. Again, Gotama, Whatever I may have done, I have certainly done no evil, and I recollect no evil. Why? Since I have done no evil, whence could suffering arise?

Thus, Gotama, this is the third assurance obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel. Again, Gotama, Whatever I may have done, I have certainly done no evil, and I have not violated the [customs of the] world, either out of fear or without fear. I have always had compassion and empathy for the entire world. My mind has been free of contention with beings, untainted, and delighted. Thus, Gotama, this is the fourth assurance obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel. These, Gotama, are the four assurances obtained by a learned noble disciple whose mind is free from fetters and resentment, without ill will or quarrel. Gotama, we have come to know it! Well-gone One, we have under stood it! World-honored One, we go for lifelong refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of monks. May the World-honored One accept us as lay followers! From this day forth until life ends we go [to him] for refuge. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, all the people of Kālāma and the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma16-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN8.79]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA16]]
> ◄  [[ma15-bdk]] 📜  [[ma17-bdk]] ►
