---
sutta_code: "MA164"
sutta_title:
  - "分別觀法 "
  - "Analytical Contemplation of Dharmas"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA164]]
> ◄  [[ma163-bdk]] 📜  [[ma165-bdk]] ►

### 164. The Discourse on an Analytical Contemplation of Dharmas

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, staying in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks: I shall teach you the Dharma that is sublime in the beginning, sublime in the middle, and also sublime in the end, with its meaning and phrasing, endowed with purity, and revealing the holy life,^340 namely a discourse on an analytical contemplation of dharmas. Listen closely, listen closely and pay proper attention. Then the monks replied, “Yes, World-honored One, we shall receive the teaching.”

The Buddha said: Monks, one may keep contemplating in such and such a way. Monks, having contemplated like this, the mind moves outward and becomes scat- tered—the mind is not settled within; and through it becomes agitated.^341 [On the other hand,] monks, one may keep contemplating in such and such a way. Monks, having contemplated like that, the mind does not move outward and does not become scattered—the mind is settled within;^342 and through not clinging it does not become agitated. In this way there will be no further birth, old age, disease, and death. This is called the end of _dukkha._ Having spoken thus, the Buddha rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation. Then the monks had this thought: “Venerable friends, it should be known that the World-honored One has risen from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation, having spoken about this matter in brief, without explaining its details, [namely:] ‘Monks, one may keep contemplating in such and such a way. Monks, having contemplated like this, the mind moves outward and becomes scattered— the mind is not settled within; and through it becomes agitated. [On the other hand,] monks, one may keep contemplating in such and such a way. Monks, having contemplated like that, the mind does not move outward and does not become scattered—the mind is settled within; and through not clinging it does not become agitated. In this way there will be no further birth, old age, disease, and death. This is called the end of _dukkha._ ”’ They further had this thought: “Venerable friends, who would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief?” They further had this thought: “The venerable Mahākaccāna is often praised by the World-honored One and by his wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Mahākaccāna would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief. Venerable friends, let us together approach the venerable Mahākaccāna and request him to explain this matter. As the venerable Mahākaccāna explains it, so we should remember it well.” Then the monks approached the venerable Mahākaccāna. Having exchanged greetings, stepped back, and sat to one side, they said:

Venerable Mahākaccāna, please know that the World-honored One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation, having spoken on this matter in brief without explaining the details, [namely:] “Monks, one may keep contemplating in such and such a way. Monks, having con templated like this, the mind moves outward and becomes scattered—the mind is not settled within; and by <clinging> it becomes agitated. [On the other hand,] monks, one may keep contemplating in such and such a way. Monks, having contemplated like that, the mind does not move outward and does not become scattered—the mind is settled within; and by not cling ing it does not become agitated. In this way there will be no further birth, old age, disease, and death. This is called the end of dukkha. ” Then we had this thought: “Venerable friends, who would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief?” We further had this thought: “The venerable Mahākaccāna is often praised by the World-honored One and by his wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Mahākaccāna would be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One has just said in brief.” May the venerable Mahākaccāna teach us in detail, out of compassion! Then the venerable Mahākaccāna said: Venerable friends, listen while I tell you a simile. On hearing a simile wise people understand the meaning. Venerable friends, it is as if there were a man wishing to search for heartwood. In search of heartwood, he enters the forest, carrying an ax. He sees a great tree possessed of roots, branches, joints, twigs, leaves, flowers, and heartwood. That man does not take hold of the roots, branches, joints, and heartwood, but only takes hold of the twigs and leaves. Venerable friends, what you have said is just like this. The World-hon ored One was present, yet you have left him and come to ask me about this matter. Why is that? Venerable friends, know this: The World-honored One is the eye, is knowledge, is meaning, is the Dharma, is the master of the Dharma, is the general of the Dharma. The teaching of the true meaning, the revelation of all meaning comes from the World-honored One. Ven erable friends, you should have approached the World-honored One himself to ask about this matter, saying: “World-honored One, how is this? What

is the meaning of this?” As the World-honored One explained it, so, ven- erable friends, you should have remembered it well.

Then the monks said:

Yes, indeed, venerable Mahākaccāna, the World-honored One is the eye, is knowledge, is meaning, is the Dharma, is the master of the Dharma, is the general of the Dharma. The teaching of the true meaning, the revelation of all meaning comes from the World-honored One. We should have approached the World-honored One to ask about this matter, saying: “World- honored One, how is this? What is the meaning of this?” As the World- honored One explained it, so we should have remembered it well. However, the venerable Mahākaccāna is often praised by the World- honored One and by his wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Mahākaccāna will be able to explain in detail the meaning of what the World-honored One said in brief. May the venerable Mahākaccāna explain it in detail, out of compassion!

The venerable Mahākaccāna said to the monks:

Venerable friends, listen together to what I shall say. Venerable friends, how does a monk’s mind move outward and become scattered? Venerable friends, a monk sees a form with the eye and his conscious- ness feeds on the characteristics of that form, his consciousness becomes attached to the pleasurable characteristics of that form, his consciousness becomes shackled to the pleasurable characteristics of that form. Being in bondage to the gratification [derived from] the characteristics of that form, his mind moves outward and becomes scattered. In the same way, with his ear... his nose... his tongue... his body... his mind he cognizes a mental object and his consciousness feeds on the characteristics of that mental object, his consciousness becomes attached to the pleasurable characteristics of that mental object, his consciousness becomes shackled to the pleasurable characteristics of that mental object. Being in bondage to the gratification [derived from] the characteristics of that mental object, his mind moves outward and becomes scattered. Venerable friends, in this way a monk’s mind moves outward and becomes scattered.

Venerable friends, how does a monk’s mind not move outward or become scattered? Venerable friends, a monk sees a form with the eye and his consciousness does not feed on the characteristics of that form, his consciousness does not become attached to the pleasurable character istics of that form, his consciousness does not become shackled to the pleasurable characteristics of that form. Not being in bondage to the grat ification [derived from] the characteristics of that form, his mind does not move outward or become scattered. In the same way, with his ear... his nose... his tongue... his body ... his mind he cognizes a mental object and his consciousness does not feed on the characteristics of that mental object, his consciousness does not become attached to the pleasurable characteristics of that mental object, his consciousness does not become shackled to the pleasurable charac teristics of that mental object. Not being in bondage to the gratification [derived from] the characteristics of that mental object, his mind does not move outward or become scattered. Venerable friends, in this way a monk’s mind does not move outward or become scattered. Venerable friends, how is a monk’s mind not settled within? Venerable friends, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion, a monk dwells having attained the first absorption. His consciousness is attached to the gratification [derived from] seclusion, depends on that, is established in that, is conditioned by that, is shackled by that—his consciousness is not settled within. Again, venerable friends, with the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, with out [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of samādhi, a monk dwells having attained the second absorption. His consciousness is attached to the gratification [derived from] samādhi, depends on that, is established in that, is conditioned by that, is shackled by that—his consciousness is not settled within. Again, venerable friends, secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling with equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, experiencing happiness with the body, a monk dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak

of as noble equanimity and mindfulness, a happy abode. His consciousness is attached to the gratification [derived from] the absence of joy, depends on that, is established in that, is conditioned by that, is shackled by that— his consciousness is not settled within. Again, venerable friends, with the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of rapture and displeasure, with neither-pain-nor-pleasure, with purity of equanimity and mindfulness, a monk dwells having attained the fourth absorption. His consciousness is attached to the gratification [derived from] purity of equanimity and mind- fulness, depends on that, is established in that, is conditioned by that, is shackled by that—his consciousness is not settled within. Again, venerable friends, by completely transcending perceptions of form, with the cessation of perceptions of sensory impact, not aware of perceptions of diversity, [aware] of infinite space, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of infinite space.^343 His consciousness is attached to the gratification [derived from] knowledge of space, depends on that, is established in that, is conditioned by that, is shackled by that—his con- sciousness is not settled within. Again, venerable friends, by completely transcending the sphere of infinite space, [aware] of infinite consciousness, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of infinite consciousness. His consciousness is attached to the gratification [derived from] knowledge of consciousness, depends on that, is established in that, is conditioned by that, is shackled by that— his consciousness is not settled within. Again, venerable friends, by completely transcending the sphere of infinite consciousness, [aware that] “there is nothing,” a monk dwells having attained the sphere of nothingness. His consciousness is attached to the gratification [derived from] knowledge of nothingness, depends on that, is established in that, is conditioned by that, is shackled by that— his consciousness is not settled within. Again, venerable friends, by completely transcending the sphere of nothingness, [aware] of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception. His consciousness is attached to the gratification [derived from] knowledge of [neither-perception-nor-]nonperception, depends on that, is established

in that, is conditioned by that, is shackled by that—his consciousness is not settled within. Venerable friends, in this way a monk’s mind is not settled within. Venerable friends, how is a monk’s mind settled within? Venerable friends, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwhole some states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion, a monk dwells having attained the first absorption. His consciousness is not attached to the grat ification [derived from] seclusion, does not depend on that, is not estab lished in that, is not conditioned by that, is not shackled by that—his con sciousness is settled within. Again, venerable friends, with the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of samādhi, a monk dwells having attained the second absorption. His consciousness is not attached to the gratification [derived from] samādhi, does not depend on that, is not established in that, is not conditioned by that, is not shackled by that—his conscious ness is settled within. Again, venerable friends, secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling with equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, experiencing happiness with the body, a monk dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mindfulness, a happy abode. His consciousness is not attached to the gratification [derived from] the absence of joy, does not depend on that, is not established in that, is not conditioned by that, is not shackled by that—his consciousness is settled within. Again, venerable friends, with the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of rapture and displeasure, with nei ther-pain-nor-pleasure, with purity of equanimity and mindfulness, a monk dwells having attained the fourth absorption. His consciousness is not attached to the gratification [derived from] purity of equanimity and mind fulness, does not depend on that, is not established in that, is not conditioned by that, is not shackled by that—his consciousness is settled within.

Again, venerable friends, by completely transcending perceptions of form, with the cessation of perceptions of sensory impact, not aware of perceptions of diversity, [aware] of infinite space, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of infinite space. His consciousness is not attached to the gratification [derived from] knowledge of space, does not depend on that, is not established in that, is not conditioned by that, is not shackled by that—his consciousness is settled within. Again, venerable friends, by completely transcending the sphere of infinite space, [aware] of infinite consciousness, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of infinite consciousness. His consciousness is not attached to the gratification [derived from] knowledge of consciousness, does not depend on that, is not established in that, is not conditioned by that, is not shackled by that—his consciousness is settled within. Again, venerable friends, by completely transcending the sphere of infinite consciousness, [aware that] “there is nothing,” a monk dwells having attained the sphere of nothingness. His consciousness is not attached to the gratification [derived from] knowledge of nothingness, does not depend on that, is not established in that, is not conditioned by that, is not shackled by that—his consciousness is settled within. Again, venerable friends, by completely transcending the sphere of nothingness, [aware] of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception. His consciousness is not attached to the gratification [derived from] knowl- edge of [neither-perception-nor-]nonperception, does not depend on that, is not established in that, is not conditioned by that, is not shackled by that—his consciousness is settled within. Venerable friends, in this way a monk’s mind is settled within. Venerable friends, how is there agitation for a monk through ? Venerable friends, [here] a monk is not separated from defilement by form, not separated from desire for form, not separated from craving for form, not separated from thirst for form. Venerable friends, if a monk is not separated from defilement by form, not separated from desire for form, not separated from craving for form, not separated from thirst for form, then he desires to get form, seeks form,

is attached to form, is established in form, [and he considers that] “I am form” and “form is mine.”^344 Desiring to get form, [seeking form,] attached to form, established in form, [and considering that] “I am form” and “form is mine,” his consciousness seizes on form. His consciousness having seized on form, when that form changes, his consciousness revolves around form. [As] his consciousness revolves around form, states of agitation arise and his mind becomes established in them. Because his mind does not understand, he is afraid and troubled. Through <clinging>, he is agitated. It is the same with feeling... with perception... with formations.... A monk is not separated from defilement by consciousness, not separated from desire for consciousness, not separated from craving for conscious ness, not separated from thirst for consciousness. Venerable friends, if a monk is not separated from defilement by con sciousness, not separated from desire for consciousness, not separated from craving for consciousness, not separated from thirst for consciousness, then he desires to get consciousness, seeks consciousness, is attached to consciousness, is established in consciousness, [and he considers:] “I am consciousness” and “consciousness is mine.” Desiring to get consciousness, seeking consciousness, attached to consciousness, established in conscious ness, [and considering:] “I am consciousness” and “consciousness is mine,” his consciousness seizes on consciousness. His consciousness having seized on consciousness, when that consciousness changes, his consciousness revolves around consciousness. [As] his consciousness revolves around consciousness, states of agitation arise and his mind becomes established in them. Because his mind does not understand, he is afraid and troubled. Through <clinging>, he is agitated. Venerable friends, in this way there is agitation for a monk through <clinging>. Venerable friends, how is there no agitation for a monk who does not cling? Venerable friends, [here] a monk is separated from defilement by form, separated from desire for form, separated from craving for form, separated from thirst for form. Venerable friends, if a monk is separated from defilement by form, separated from desire for form, separated from craving for form, separated from thirst for form, then he does not desire to get form, does not seek form, is not attached to form, is not established in form, and he does not

[consider:] “I am form,” or “form is mine.” Not desiring to get form, not seeking form, not attached to form, not established in form, not [consid- ering,] “I am form,” or “form is mine,” his consciousness does not seize on form. His consciousness not having seized on form, when that form changes, his consciousness does not revolve around form. [As] his con- sciousness does not revolve around form, states of agitation do not arise and his mind does not become established in them. Because his mind understands, he is not afraid and not troubled. Through not clinging, he is not agitated. It is the same with feeling... with perception... with formations.... A monk is separated from defilement by consciousness, separated from desire for consciousness, separated from craving for consciousness, sep- arated from thirst for consciousness. Venerable friends, if a monk is separated from defilement by conscious- ness, separated from desire for consciousness, separated from craving for consciousness, separated from thirst for consciousness, then he does not desire to get consciousness, does not seek consciousness, is not attached to consciousness, is not established in consciousness, does not [consider], “I am consciousness,” or “consciousness is mine.” Not desiring to get con- sciousness, not seeking consciousness, not attached to consciousness, not established in consciousness, not [considering], “I am consciousness,” or “consciousness is mine,” his consciousness does not seize on consciousness. His consciousness not having seized on consciousness, when that con- sciousness changes, his consciousness does not revolve around conscious- ness. [As] his consciousness does not revolve around consciousness, states of agitation do not arise and his mind does not become established in them. Because his mind understands, he is not afraid and not troubled. Through not clinging, he does not become agitated. Venerable friends, in this way there is no agitation for a monk who does not cling. Venerable friends, the World-honored One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation, having spoken in brief about this matter, without explaining the details, [namely:] “Monks, one may keep contem- plating in such and such a way. Monks, having contemplated like this, the mind moves outward and becomes scattered—the mind is not settled **within** ; and through it becomes agitated. [On the other hand,]

monks, one may keep contemplating in such and such a way. Monks, hav ing contemplated like that, the mind does not move outward and does not become scattered—the mind is settled within; and by not clinging it does not become agitated. In this way there will be no further birth, old age, disease, and death. This is called the end of dukkha. ” This matter, which the World-honored One spoke about in brief without explaining its details, I have explained in detail in this way, employing these phrases and words. Venerable friends, approach the Buddha and set out [my explanation] in full [to him]. As the World-honored One explains its meaning, venerable friends, remember it. Then, having heard what the venerable Mahākaccāna had said, bearing well in mind [how] to recite it, the monks rose from their seats, circumambulated the venerable Mahākaccāna three times, and left. They approached the Buddha. Having paid homage to him, they stepped back, sat to one side, and said: World-honored One, the instruction that the World-honored One gave in brief without explaining its meaning in detail, after which he rose from his seat and entered his dwelling to sit in meditation—the venerable Mahā kaccāna has explained it to us in detail employing these phrases and words. Having heard it, the World-honored One expressed praise: It is well, it is well, my disciple is endowed with the eye, with knowledge, with Dharma, with meaning. Why is that? [Because] in regard to this matter which the teacher taught to the disciples in brief, without explaining its details, that disciple has taught it in detail employing these phrases and words. You should remember it like this, [just] as the monk Mahā kaccāna has taught it. Why is that? According to this explanation, so you should contemplate the meaning.^345 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma164-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.192]], [[AN7.64]], [[AN8.54]], [[UD6.2]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA164]]
> ◄  [[ma163-bdk]] 📜  [[ma165-bdk]] ►
