---
sutta_code: "MA179"
sutta_title:
  - "五支物主 "
  - "Carpenter Pañcakaṅga"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA179]]
> ◄  [[ma178-bdk]] 📜  [[ma180-bdk]] ►

### 179. The Discourse to the Carpenter Pañcakaṅga

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the carpenter Pañcakaṅga had left Sāvatthī at dawn and was approaching the place where the Buddha was staying with the intention of visiting the World-honored One and paying homage. Then the carpenter Pañcakaṅga had this thought: “For the time being I will put off visiting the Buddha. The World-honored One may be sitting in meditation, and the venerable monks also. Let me now rather visit Mallikā’s Single-halled Park for heterodox practitioners.” Then, to divert and amuse himself, the carpenter Pañcakaṅga took the path to the tinduka plantation, to visit Mallikā’s Single-halled Park for het erodox practitioners. At that time in Mallikā’s Single-halled Park for heterodox practitioners there was a heterodox practitioner, the renunciant Samaṇamuṇḍikāputta, a great leader, teacher of a congregation, esteemed by the people, a teacher leading a great community of five hundred heterodox practitioners. He was in a noisy crowd that was creating a great uproar, noisily talking various kinds of useless talk: talk about kings, talk about thieves, talk about battles and quarrels, talk about food and drink, talk about robes and blankets, talk about married women, talk about girls, talk about promiscuous women, talk about the world, talk about evil ways, and talk about what is in the ocean. They were gathered like this talking various kinds of useless talk.

Seeing the carpenter Pañcakaṅga coming in the distance, the heterodox prac- titioner Samaṇamuṇḍikāputta personally admonished his own congregation:

Keep quiet! Be quiet, all of you! Do not speak another word! You should collect and control yourselves. The carpenter Pañcakaṅga, a disciple of the renunciant Gotama, is coming. Among the lay disciples of the renunciant Gotama that live in Sāvatthī, none surpasses the carpenter Pañcakaṅga. Why is that? He delights in silence and praises silence. If he sees that this congregation is silent, perhaps he will come here. Then the heterodox practitioner Samaṇamuṇḍikāputta, having stopped his congregation, remained silent himself. Then the carpenter Pañcakaṅga approached the heterodox practitioner Samaṇamuṇḍikāputta, exchanged greetings with him, stepped back, and sat to one side. The heterodox practitioner Samaṇamuṇḍikāputta said: Carpenter, if someone is endowed with four things, I describe him as accom- plished in wholesomeness, foremost in wholesomeness, an unsurpassable person who has attained the supreme essence, a true renunciant. What are the four? He does not do evil deeds with the body, he does not speak evil words with the mouth, he does not engage in wrong liveli- hood, and he does not think evil thoughts. Carpenter, if someone is endowed with these four things I describe him as accomplished in whole- someness, foremost in wholesomeness, an unsurpassable person who has attained the supreme essence, a true renunciant. On hearing this statement made by the heterodox practitioner Samaṇa- muṇḍikāputta, the carpenter Pañcakaṅga neither agreed nor disagreed. He rose from his seat and left, [reflecting,] “I shall myself approach the Buddha and ask about the meaning of this statement.” He then approached the Buddha, paid homage with his head, stepped back, and sat to one side. He told the Buddha the whole conversation he had had with the heterodox practitioner Samaṇamuṇḍikāputta. Having heard it, the World-honored One said: Carpenter, if what the heterodox practitioner Samaṇamuṇḍikāputta said were indeed the case, then a small infant with tender limbs, lying on its

back sleeping, would also be accomplished in wholesomeness, foremost in wholesomeness, an unsurpassable person who has attained the supreme essence, a true renunciant. Carpenter, a small infant has, as yet, no perception of “body,” let alone of “doing evil bodily deeds.” All it can do is move its body. Carpenter, a small infant has, as yet, no perception of “mouth,” let alone of “speaking evil words.” All it can do is cry. Carpenter, a small infant has, as yet, no perception of “livelihood,” let alone of “engaging in wrong livelihood.” All it can do is moan. Carpenter, a small infant has, as yet, no perception of “thoughts,” let alone of “thinking wrong thoughts.” All it can think of is the mother’s milk.^425 Carpenter, if it were as the heterodox practitioner Samaṇamuṇḍikāputta proposes, then a small infant would be accomplished in wholesomeness, foremost in wholesomeness, an unsurpassable person who has attained the supreme essence, a true renunciant. Carpenter, if someone is endowed with four things, I describe him as accomplished in wholesomeness, as foremost in wholesomeness, but not as an unsurpassable person, not as one who has attained the supreme essence, not as a true renunciant.^426 What are the four? He does not do evil deeds with the body, he does not speak evil words with the mouth, he does not engage in wrong liveli hood, and he does not think evil thoughts. Carpenter, if someone is endowed with these four things, I describe him as accomplished in wholesomeness, as foremost in wholesomeness, but not as an unsurpassable person, not as one who has attained the supreme essence, not as a true renunciant. Carpenter, bodily deeds and verbal deeds I refer to as being conduct. Carpenter, thoughts I refer to as belonging to the mind and connected with the mind. Carpenter, I say one should know unwholesome conduct; one should know from where unwholesome conduct arises; one should know where unwholesome conduct ceases without remainder, where it is destroyed without remainder; and one should know by what practice a noble disciple brings about the cessation of unwholesome conduct.

Carpenter, I say one should know wholesome conduct; one should know from where wholesome conduct arises; one should know where wholesome conduct ceases without remainder, where it is destroyed without remainder; and one should know by what practice a noble disciple brings about the cessation of wholesome conduct. Carpenter, I say one should know unwholesome thoughts; one should know from where unwholesome thoughts arise; one should know where unwholesome thoughts cease without remainder, where they are destroyed without remainder; and one should know by what practice a noble disciple brings about the cessation of unwholesome thoughts. Carpenter, I say one should know wholesome thoughts; one should know from where wholesome thoughts arise; one should know where wholesome thoughts cease without remainder, where they are destroyed without remainder; and one should know by what practice a noble disciple brings about the cessation of wholesome thoughts. Carpenter, what is unwholesome conduct? Unwholesome bodily actions, unwholesome verbal and mental actions, these are reckoned as unwhole- some conduct.^427 Carpenter, from where does this unwholesome conduct arise? I will declare the place from which it arises. One should know that it arises from the mind. What kind of mind? It is a mind with sensual desire, with ill will, and with delusion. One should know that unwholesome conduct arises from this kind of mind. Carpenter, where does unwholesome conduct cease without remainder, where is it destroyed without remainder? [If] a learned noble disciple abandons unwholesome bodily deeds and develops wholesome bodily deeds, abandons unwholesome verbal or mental deeds and develops wholesome verbal or mental deeds—this is where unwholesome conduct ceases without remainder, is destroyed without remainder. Carpenter, by what practice does a noble disciple bring about the ces- sation of unwholesome conduct? If a learned noble disciple contemplates the body as a body internally... up to... contemplates feelings... states of mind... dharmas as dharmas—if a noble disciple practices like this, he brings about the cessation of unwholesome conduct.^428

Carpenter, what is wholesome conduct? Wholesome bodily deeds, whole some verbal and mental deeds, these are reckoned as wholesome conduct. Carpenter, from where does this wholesome conduct arise? I will declare the place from which it arises. One should know that it arises from the mind. What kind of mind? It is a mind free from sensual desire, free from ill will, and free from delusion. One should know that wholesome conduct arises from this kind of mind. Carpenter, where does wholesome conduct cease without remainder, where is it destroyed without remainder? If a learned noble disciple prac tices virtue without being attached to virtue, this is where wholesome conduct ceases without remainder, is destroyed without remainder.^429 Carpenter, by what practice does a noble disciple bring about the ces sation of wholesome conduct? If a learned noble disciple contemplates the body as a body internally... up to... contemplates feelings... states of mind... dharmas as dharmas—if a noble disciple practices like this, he brings about the cessation of wholesome conduct. Carpenter, what are unwholesome thoughts? Thoughts of sensual desire, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of harming; these are unwholesome thoughts. Carpenter, from where do unwholesome thoughts arise? I will declare the place from which they arise. One should know that they arise from perception. What kind of perception? I declare that perceptions are of many kinds, of countless kinds, with various kinds of activities; they may be perceptions of sensual desire, or perceptions of ill will, or perceptions of harming. Carpenter, because of perceptions based on the element of sensual desire, there arise in living beings unwholesome thoughts that are connected with the element of sensual desire. If there are [such] perceptions, [then] because of those perceptions there arise unwholesome thoughts connected with the element of sensual desire. Carpenter, because of perceptions based on the element of ill will or the element of harming, there arise in living beings unwholesome thoughts that are connected with the element of ill will or the element of harming. If there are [such] perceptions, then because of those perceptions there arise unwholesome thoughts connected with the element of ill will or the

element of harming. This is how unwholesome thoughts arise from this kind of perception. Carpenter, where do unwholesome thoughts cease without remainder, where are they destroyed without remainder? When, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, with [directed] aware- ness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion, a learned noble disciple dwells having attained the first absorp- tion—this is how unwholesome thoughts cease without remainder, are destroyed without remainder. Carpenter, by what practice does a noble disciple bring about the ces- sation of unwholesome thoughts? If a learned noble disciple contemplates the body as a body internally... up to... contemplates feelings... states of mind... dharmas as dharmas—if a noble disciple practices like this, he brings about the cessation of unwholesome thoughts. Carpenter, what are wholesome thoughts? Thoughts free from sensuality, thoughts free from ill will, and thoughts free from harming; these are wholesome thoughts. Carpenter, from where do wholesome thoughts arise? I will declare the place from which they arise. One should know that they arise from perception. What kind of perception? I say, perceptions are of many kinds, of countless kinds, with several kinds of activity; they may be perceptions free from sensuality, or perceptions free from ill will, or perceptions free from harming. Carpenter, because of perceptions based on the element of absence of sensual desire, there arise in living beings wholesome thoughts that are connected with the element of absence of sensual desire. If there are [such] perceptions, then because of those perceptions there arise wholesome thoughts connected with the element of absence of sensual desire. Carpenter, because of perceptions based on the element of non-ill will or the element of nonharming, there arise in living beings wholesome thoughts that are connected with the element of non-ill will or the element of nonharming. If there are [such] perceptions, then because of those per- ceptions there arise wholesome thoughts connected with the element of non- or the element of nonharming.^430 This is [how] wholesome thoughts arise from this kind of perception.

Carpenter, where do wholesome thoughts cease without remainder, where are they destroyed without remainder? If, with the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of joy and displeasure with neither-pain-nor-pleasure, equanimity, mindfulness, and purity, a learned noble disciple dwells having attained the fourth absorption—this is [where] wholesome thoughts cease without remainder, are destroyed without remainder.^431 Carpenter, by what practice does a noble disciple bring about the ces sation of wholesome thoughts? If a learned noble disciple contemplates the body as a body internally... up to... contemplates feelings... states of mind... dharmas as dharmas, if a noble disciple practices like this, he brings about the cessation of wholesome thoughts.^432 Carpenter, suppose a learned noble disciple by wise contemplation knows unwholesome conduct as it really is, knows as it really is from where unwholesome conduct arises, and by wise contemplation knows as it really is how this unwholesome conduct ceases without remainder, is destroyed without remainder. A noble disciple who practices like this comes to know as it really is the cessation of unwholesome conduct. By wise contemplation [a noble disciple] knows wholesome conduct as it really is, knows as it really is from where wholesome conduct arises, and by wise contemplation knows as it really is how this wholesome con duct ceases without remainder, is destroyed without remainder. A noble disciple who practices like this comes to know as it really is the cessation of wholesome conduct. By wise contemplation [a noble disciple] knows unwholesome thoughts as they really are, knows as it really is from where unwholesome thoughts arise, and by wise contemplation knows as it really is how these unwhole some thoughts cease without remainder, are destroyed without remainder. A noble disciple who practices like this comes to know as it really is the cessation of unwholesome thoughts. By wise contemplation [a noble disciple] knows wholesome thoughts as they really are, knows as it really is from where wholesome thoughts arise, and by wise contemplation knows as it really is how these wholesome thoughts cease without remainder, are destroyed without remainder. A

noble disciple who practices like this comes to know as it really is the cessation of wholesome thoughts. Why is that? Based on right view arises right intention, based on right intention arises right speech, based on right speech arises right action, based on right action arises right livelihood, based on right livelihood arises right effort, based on right effort arises right mindfulness, based on right mindfulness arises right samādhi.^433 With a mind collected in this way, a noble disciple attains liberation from all sensual desire, anger, and delusion. Carpenter, a noble disciple who has rightly liberated the mind in this way comes to know: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been estab- lished, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another expe- riencing of existence.” He knows this as it really is.^434 This is the path of one in training and with vision, which is endowed with eight factors, while [that of] the arahant who has destroyed the taints is endowed with ten factors. Carpenter, what are the eight factors with which the path of one in training and with vision is endowed? They are the right view of one in training... up to... the right samādhi of one in training. These are the eight factors with which the path of one in training and with vision is endowed. Carpenter, what are the ten factors with which the arahant who has destroyed the taints is endowed? They are the right view of one beyond train- ing... up to... the right knowledge of one beyond training. These are the ten factors with which the arahant who has destroyed the taints is endowed. Carpenter, when someone has these ten factors, I describe him as accomplished in wholesomeness, foremost in wholesomeness, an unsur- passable person who has attained the supreme essence, a true renunciant. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the carpenter Pañcakaṅga and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma179-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.116]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA179]]
> ◄  [[ma178-bdk]] 📜  [[ma180-bdk]] ►
