---
sutta_code: "MA171"
sutta_title:
  - "分別大業 "
  - "Great Analysis of Karma"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA171]]
> ◄  [[ma170-bdk]] 📜  [[ma172-bdk]] ►

### 171. The Discourse on a Great Analysis of Karma

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Rājagaha, staying in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time the venerable Samiddhi was also dwelling at Rājagaha, staying in a meditation hut in the forest. Then the heterodox practitioner Potaliputta, while roaming around in the afternoon, approached the venerable Samiddhi. Having exchanged friendly greetings, he stepped back, sat to one side, [and said,] “Venerable friend Samiddhi, I would like to ask a question. Do you permit me to ask it?” The venerable Samiddhi replied, “Venerable friend Potaliputta, ask what you wish to ask. Having heard it, I will consider it.” The heterodox practitioner Potaliputta asked: Venerable friend Samiddhi, I have heard face to face from the renunciant Gotama, received it face to face from the renunciant Gotama, that bodily and verbal actions are vain and false, and only mental action is real and

true; and that there is a state of samādhi such that, when a monk enters this state of samādhi, nothing is felt. The venerable Samiddhi replied: Venerable friend Potaliputta, do not speak like this! Do not misrepresent the World-honored One! It is not good to misrepresent the World-honored One. The World-honored One does not speak like this, venerable friend Potaliputta. The World-honored One has with countless skillful means explained: “If one intentionally performs an action which, having been performed, comes to fruition, then, I say, it is not the case that one does not experience its result. Either one experiences it in this life or one experiences it in a later life. If one unintentionally performs an action which, having been performed, comes to fruition, then I do not say that one must experience its result.”^383 Three times the heterodox practitioner Potaliputta said to the venerable Samiddhi:

Venerable friend Samiddhi, I have heard face to face from the renunciant Gotama, received it face to face from the renunciant Gotama, that bodily and verbal actions are vain and false, and only mental action is real and true; and that there is a state of samādhi such that, when a monk enters this state of samādhi, nothing is felt. And three times the venerable Samiddhi replied: Venerable friend Potaliputta, do not speak like this! Do not misrepresent the World-honored One! It is not good to misrepresent the World-honored One. The World-honored One does not speak like this, venerable friend Potaliputta. The World-honored One has with countless skillful means explained: “If one intentionally performs an action which, having been performed, comes to fruition, then, I say, it is not the case that one does not experience its result; either one experiences it in this life or one experiences it in a later life. If one unintentionally performs an action which, having been performed, comes to fruition, then I do not say that one must experience its result.

The heterodox practitioner Potaliputta asked the venerable Samiddhi, “If one intentionally performs an action which, having been performed, comes to fruition, what result will one experience?”^384 The venerable Samiddhi replied, “Venerable friend Potaliputta, if one intentionally performs an action which, having been performed, comes to fruition, one will certainly experience _dukkha._ ” The heterodox practitioner Potaliputta asked the venerable Samiddhi, “Venerable friend Samiddhi, how long have you been training on the path of this Dharma and discipline?” The venerable Samiddhi replied, “Venerable friend Potaliputta, I have not been training on the path of this Dharma and discipline for long; [just] three years.” Then the heterodox practitioner Potaliputta thought, “If even such a junior monk is capable of defending his teacher, how much more so would senior elders who are veterans in the training!” Then the heterodox practitioner Potaliputta, having heard what the venerable Samiddhi said, neither agreed nor disagreed with it, but rose from his seat and left, shaking his head. At that time the venerable Mahācunda was seated for the day’s abiding in a place not far from the venerable Samiddhi. Then the venerable Mahā- cunda, who had memorized and borne well in mind the whole conversation that had taken place between the venerable Samiddhi and the heterodox prac- titioner Potaliputta, rose from his seat and approached the venerable Ānanda. Having exchanged friendly greetings, he stepped back, sat to one side, and reported to the venerable Ānanda the whole conversation that had taken place between the venerable Samiddhi and the heterodox practitioner Potaliputta.^385 Having heard it, the venerable Ānanda said: Venerable friend Cunda, in relation to this conversation, let us go and visit the Buddha and present it to the World-honored One. Venerable friend Cunda, let us now together approach the Buddha and tell the World-hon- ored One all about this matter. Perhaps we will thereby get to hear from the World-honored One a teaching that differs [from Samiddhi’s reply].” Then the venerable Ānanda and the venerable Mahācunda went together to the Buddha. The venerable Mahācunda paid homage with his head at the

Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side; the venerable Ānanda paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and stood to one side. Then the venerable Ānanda said, “Venerable friend Mahācunda, please speak, please speak!” Then the World-honored One asked, “Ānanda, what matter does the monk Cunda wish to speak about?” The venerable Ānanda said, “The World-honored One will now hear it from him directly.” Then the venerable Mahācunda reported to the Buddha the whole conver- sation that had taken place between the venerable Samiddhi and the heterodox practitioner Potaliputta. Having heard it, the World-honored One said:

See, Ānanda. The monk Samiddhi, this foolish man, is on the wrong track. Why is that? The heterodox practitioner Potaliputta asked about a matter that is not definite, but the monk Samiddhi, this foolish man, gave a definite answer.^386 The venerable Ānanda said, “World-honored One, if the monk Samiddhi was speaking in relation to the dictum that whatever is felt is _dukkha,_ then what is his fault?”^387 The World-honored One reproved the venerable Ānanda: See, the monk Ānanda is also on the wrong track. Ānanda, this foolish man Samiddhi was asked by the heterodox practitioner Potaliputta about all three feelings: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, and neutral feeling. Ānanda, this foolish man Samiddhi [should have] answered the question by the heterodox practitioner Potaliputta like this: “Venerable friend Potal- iputta, if one intentionally performs a pleasant action which, having been performed, comes to fruition, then one will experience a pleasant result. If one intentionally performs a painful action which, having been per- formed, comes to fruition, then one will experience a painful result. If one intentionally performs a neutral action which, having been performed, comes to fruition, then one will experience a neutral result.” Ānanda, if this foolish man Samiddhi had answered the question by the heterodox practitioner Potaliputta like this, then the heterodox prac- titioner Potaliputta would not even have dared to look this foolish man

Samiddhi in the eye, let alone ask him such a question. Ānanda, if you were to hear from the World-honored One the “Discourse on a Great Analysis of Karma,” then you would develop greater and superior mental tranquility and happiness with regard to the Tathāgata. Then the venerable Ānanda, extending his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, said: World-honored One, now is the right time; Well-gone One, now is the right time for the World-honored One to deliver the “Discourse on a Great Analysis of Karma.” Having heard it, the monks will remember it well. The World-honored One said, “Ānanda, listen closely and pay proper attention. I will analyze it in detail for you.” The venerable Ānanda said, “Yes, certainly.” Then the monks listened to receive the teaching. The Buddha said: Ānanda, suppose that someone does not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; not having refrained, not having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. Ānanda, suppose that someone [does] refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; hav ing refrained, having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Ānanda, suppose that someone does not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; not having refrained, not having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Ānanda, suppose that someone [does] refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; hav ing refrained, having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven.^388 Ānanda, [consider the case of] someone who does not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; not having refrained, not having exercised restraint,

on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. A renunciant or brahmin who has attained the divine eye, who is accomplished in the divine eye, sees that. Having seen it, he thinks, “There is no evil bodily conduct and there is no result of evil bodily conduct; there is no evil verbal or mental conduct and there is no result of evil verbal or mental conduct. Why is that? I saw someone who did not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual mis- conduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view. Not having refrained, not having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he was reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. “Hence those who in this way do not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; all of those who have not refrained, not exercised restraint will, on the breaking up of the body at death, also be reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. Whoever holds such a view has right view; for those with other views, their knowledge inclines toward the false.” He strongly holds to what he has seen and known. Being attached to it, he declares as definite, “This is true, all else is wrong!” Ānanda, [consider the case of] someone who refrains from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; having refrained, having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. A renunciant or brahmin who has attained the divine eye, who is accom- plished in the divine eye, sees that. Having seen it, he thinks, “There is no good bodily conduct and there is no result of good bodily conduct; there is no good verbal or mental con- duct and there is no result of good verbal or mental conduct. Why is that? I saw someone who refrained from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; having refrained, having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he was reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. “Hence those who in this way refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view—all of those who have refrained, exercised restraint will, on the breaking up of

the body at death, also be reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Who ever holds such a view has right view; for those with other views, their knowledge inclines toward the false.” He strongly holds to what he has seen and known. Being attached to it, he declares as definite, “This is true, all else is wrong!” Ānanda, [consider the case of] someone who does not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; not having refrained, not having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. A renunciant or brahmin who has attained the divine eye, who is accomplished in the divine eye, sees that. Having seen it, he thinks, “There is evil bodily conduct and there is a result of evil bodily conduct; there is evil verbal or mental conduct and there is a result of evil verbal and mental conduct. Why is that? I saw someone who did not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual mis conduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; not having refrained, not having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he was reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. “Hence those who in this way do not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; all of those who have not refrained, not exercised restraint will, on the breaking up of the body at death, also be reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Whoever holds such a view has right view; for those with other views, their knowledge inclines toward the false.” He strongly holds to what he has seen and known. Being attached to it, he declares as definite, “This is true, all else is wrong!” Ānanda, [consider the case of] someone who refrains from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; having refrained, having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. A renunciant or brahmin who has attained the divine eye, who is accom plished in the divine eye, sees that. Having seen it, he thinks, “There is good bodily conduct and there is a result of good bodily conduct, there is good verbal or mental conduct, and there is a result of good verbal or mental conduct. Why is that? I saw

someone who refrained from killing, from stealing, from sexual miscon- duct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; having refrained, having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he was reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. “Hence those who in this way refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view—all of those who have refrained, exercised restraint will, on the breaking up of the body at death, also be reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. Whoever holds such a view has right view; for those with other views, their knowledge inclines toward the false.” He strongly holds to what he has seen and known. Being attached to it, he declares as definite, “This is true, all else is wrong!” Herein, Ānanda, if a renunciant or brahmin who has attained the divine eye, who is accomplished in the divine eye, makes a statement like this: “There is no evil bodily conduct and there is no result of evil bodily con- duct; there is no evil verbal or mental conduct and there is no result of evil verbal or mental conduct”—I do not accept this. If, [however,] he makes a statement like this: “I saw someone who did not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; not having refrained, not having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he was reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven”—I accept that. If he makes a statement like this: “Hence those who in this way do not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech

... up to... wrong view; all of those who have not refrained, not exercised restraint will, on the breaking up of the body at death, also be reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven”—I do not accept that. If he makes a statement like this: “Whoever holds such a view has right view; as for those with other views, their knowledge inclines toward the false”—I do not accept that. If he strongly holds to what he has seen and known, is attached to it and declares as definite: “This is true, all else is wrong!”—I do not accept that. Why is that? Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows that this man is otherwise. Herein, Ānanda, if a renunciant or brahmin who has attained the divine eye, who is accomplished in the divine eye, makes a statement like this:

“There is no good bodily conduct and there is no result of good bodily conduct; there is no good verbal or mental conduct and there is no result of good verbal or mental conduct”—I do not accept that. If, [however,] he makes a statement like this: “I saw someone who refrained from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; having refrained, having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he was reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell”—I accept that. If he makes a statement like this: “Hence those who in this way refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; all of those who have refrained, exercised restraint will, on the breaking up of the body at death, also be reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell”—I do not accept that. If he makes a statement like this: “Whoever holds such a view has right view; as for those with other views, their knowledge inclines toward the false”—I do not accept that. If he strongly holds to what he has seen and known, is attached to it and declares as definite: “This is true, all else is wrong!”—I do not accept that. Why is that? Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows that this man is otherwise. Herein, Ānanda, if a renunciant or brahmin who has attained the divine eye, who is accomplished in the divine eye, makes a statement like this: “There is evil bodily conduct and there is a result of evil bodily conduct; there is evil verbal or mental conduct and there is a result of evil verbal or mental conduct”—I accept that. If he makes a statement like this: “I saw someone who did not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; not having refrained, not having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he was reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell”—I accept that. If he makes a statement like this: “Hence those who in this way do not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; all of those who have not refrained, not exercised restraint will, on the breaking up of the body at death, also be reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell”—I do not accept that.

If he makes a statement like this: “Whoever holds such a view has right view; as for those with other views, their knowledge inclines toward the false”—I do not accept that. If he strongly holds to what he has seen and known, is attached to it and declares as definite: “This is true, all else is wrong!”—I do not accept that. Why is that? Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows that this man is otherwise. Herein, Ānanda, if a renunciant or brahmin who has attained the divine eye, who is accomplished in the divine eye, makes a statement like this: “There is good bodily conduct and there is a result of good bodily conduct; there is good verbal or mental conduct and there is a result of good verbal or mental conduct”—I accept that. If he makes a statement like this: “I saw someone who refrained from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; having refrained, having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he was reborn in a good realm of exis- tence, in heaven”—I accept that. If he makes a statement like this: “Hence those who in this way refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; all of those who have refrained, exercised restraint will, on the breaking up of the body at death, also be reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven”—I do not accept that. If he makes a statement like this: “Whoever holds such a view has right view; as for those with other views, their knowledge inclines toward the false”—I do not accept that. If he strongly holds to what he has seen and known, is attached to it and declares as definite: “This is true, all else is wrong!”—I do not accept that. Why is that? Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows that this man is otherwise. Ānanda, [consider the case of] someone who did not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; not having refrained and not having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. If he had earlier performed unwholesome deeds which, having been performed, come to fruition, then because of his lack of refraining and lack of restraint, [either] he has in the present [already] experienced the

complete result and is therefore reborn there [in heaven], or [this happens] because he will experience the [painful] result later. [But in either case] it is not because of these [unwholesome deeds], not for this reason, that on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. Again, it may be that he had earlier performed wholesome deeds which, having been performed, come to fruition, and because of his [earlier] refraining and restraint the experiencing of results in a good realm of exis tence has not yet been exhausted, and because of these [wholesome deeds], for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. Again, it may also be that at the time of death he gave rise to a wholesome state of mind, a state of mind endowed with qualities connected with right view, and that because of this, for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows that this person is like this.^389 Ānanda, [consider the case of] someone who refrained from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; having refrained and having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. If he had earlier performed wholesome deeds which, having been performed, come to fruition, then because of his refraining and lack of restraint, [either] he has in the present [already] experienced the complete result and is there fore reborn there [in hell], or [this happens] because he will experience the [pleasant] result later. [But in either case] it is not because of these [wholesome deeds], not for this reason, that on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Again, it may be that he had earlier performed unwholesome deeds which, having been performed, come to fruition, and because of his [earlier] lack of refraining and lack of restraint the experiencing of results in hell has not yet been exhausted, and because of these [unwholesome deeds], for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Again, it may also be that at the time of death he gave rise to an unwholesome state of mind, a state of mind endowed with qualities connected with wrong view, and that because of

this, for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows that this person is like this. Ānanda, [consider the case of] someone who did not refrain from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; not having refrained, not having exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad destination, in hell. Because of this [unwholesome behavior], for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Again, it may also be that he had earlier performed unwholesome deeds which, having been performed, come to fruition, and because of his [earlier] lack of refraining and lack of restraint, the results that he should experience in a bad realm of existence, in hell, have not yet been exhausted; and that because of this, for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Again, it may also be that at the time of death he gave rise to an unwholesome state of mind, a state of mind endowed with qualities connected with wrong view; and that because of this, for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a bad realm of existence, in hell. Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows that this person is like this. Ānanda, [consider the case of] someone who refrained from killing, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech... up to... wrong view; having refrained and exercised restraint, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. Because of this [wholesome behavior], for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. Again, it may also be that he had earlier performed wholesome deeds which, having been performed, come to fruition, and because of his [earlier] refraining and restraint, the results that he should experience in a good realm of existence have not yet been exhausted; and that because of this, for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good realm of existence, in heaven. Again, it may also be that at the time of death he gave rise to a wholesome state of mind, a state of mind endowed with qualities connected with right view; and that because of this, for this reason, on the breaking up of the body at death he is reborn in a good

realm of existence, in heaven. Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows that this person is like this. Again, there are four types of person. It may be that someone does not have it but appears to have it, or that he has it but appears not to have it, or that he does not have it and appears not to have it, or that he has it and appears to have it. Ānanda, it is just as four types of fruit. It may be that a fruit is unripe but appears ripe, or that it is ripe but appears unripe, or that it is unripe and appears unripe, or that it is ripe and appears ripe.^390 In the same way, Ānanda, there are four types of person. It may be that someone does not have it but appears to have it, or that he has it but appears not to have it, or that he does not have it and appears not to have it, or that he has it and appears to have it. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Ānanda and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

####

**On the Mind**


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma171-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[PLI-TV-KD1]], [[SN4.15]], [[]], [[SN4.5]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN3.61]], [[AN4.77]], [[AN6.63]], [[AN8.40.]], [[MA170]], [[MN135]], [[MN41]], [[SN36.11]], [[SN42.13]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA171]]
> ◄  [[ma170-bdk]] 📜  [[ma172-bdk]] ►
