---
sutta_code: "MA173"
sutta_title:
  - "大天捺林 "
  - "Mahādeva’sMango Grove"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA173]]
> ◄  [[ma172-bdk]] 📜  [[ma174-bdk]] ►

### 173. The Discourse to Bhūmija

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.

At that time the venerable Bhūmija was also staying at Rājagaha, in a secluded meditation hut. Then, when the night was over, at dawn, the venerable Bhūmija put on his robes and took his almsbowl, intending to go into Rājagaha to beg for almsfood. Then the venerable Bhūmija had this thought: “For the time being, never mind about going into Rājagaha to beg for food. Let me rather approach the house of Prince Jayasena.” Then the venerable Bhūmija approached the house of Prince Jayasena. On seeing the venerable Bhūmija coming in the distance, Prince Jayasena rose from his seat, arranged his clothes so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the venerable Bhūmija, and said, “Wel- come, venerable Bhūmija. It is a long time since the venerable Bhūmija came here. Please be seated on this seat.” Then the venerable Bhūmija sat down. Prince Jayasena paid homage with his head at the venerable Bhūmija’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. He said, “Venerable Bhūmija, I would like to ask a question. Do you permit me to ask it?” The venerable Bhūmija replied, “Prince, ask whatever you wish. Having heard [your question], I will consider it.” The prince asked the venerable Bhūmija: Sometimes there are renunciants and brahmins who come and call on me. They tell me: “Prince, if one makes an aspiration and the holy life, then one will certainly get results; or if one does not make an aspiration... or if one both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... or if one neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and practices the holy life, then one will certainly get results.”^397 Venerable Bhūmija, what is the position of your venerable teacher? What does he say [regarding this]?^398 The venerable Bhūmija said: Prince, I have not myself heard [anything regarding this] from the World- honored One or from my companions in the holy life. However, prince, the World-honored One might speak in this manner: “If one makes an aspiration and properly practices the holy life, then one will certainly get results; or if one does not make an aspiration... or if one both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... or if one neither makes an

aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and properly practices the holy life, then one will certainly get results.” The prince said: If the position of the venerable teacher of the venerable Bhūmija is like this and he speaks like this, then in this world with its deva s and māra s, Brahmās, renunciants and brahmins, from human beings to deva s, he is foremost and supreme. Venerable Bhūmija, please take your meal here.^399 The venerable Bhūmija accepted by remaining silent. Knowing that the venerable Bhūmija had accepted by remaining silent, the prince rose from his seat and personally brought water for washing [the hands], and personally offered various kinds of fine dishes, delicious, plentiful, and easy to digest, making sure there was enough. After the meal, he gathered up the utensils, again brought water for washing, and then seated himself on a small seat to one side to listen to the Dharma. The venerable Bhūmija expounded the Dharma to him, exhorting and inspiring him, fully delighting him, teaching him the Dharma with countless skillful means. Having exhorted and inspired him, having fully delighted him, [the venerable Bhūmija] rose from his seat and left. He approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, he stepped back and sat to one side. He reported to the Buddha the whole conversation he had had with the prince. On hearing it, the World-honored One said, “Bhūmija, why did you not think to speak four similes to the prince?”^400 The venerable Bhūmija asked, “World-honored One, which four similes?” The World-honored One replied: Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has wrong view... and con centration [based] on wrong view, makes an aspiration and wrongly prac tices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results; if he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the wrong way, namely by what is not the [right] path.

Bhūmija, it is just as a man who, wanting to get milk by pulling on a cow’s horn, will certainly not get milk. If he [makes an aspiration... if he] does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration, wanting to get milk by pulling on a cow’s horn, then he will certainly not get milk. Why is that? He is seeking milk in the wrong way, namely by pulling on the cow’s horn.^401 In the same way, Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has wrong view... and samādhi [based] on wrong view, makes an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the wrong way, namely by what is not the [right] path. Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has right view... and concen- tration [based] on right view makes an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. If he does not make an aspiration

... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the right way, namely by the [right] path. Bhūmija, it is just as a man who, wanting to get milk by pulling on the udder of a well-fed milking cow, will certainly get milk. If he [makes an aspi- ration... if he] does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration, wanting to get milk by pulling on the udder of a well- fed milking cow, then he will certainly get milk. Why is that? He is seeking milk in the right way, namely by pulling on the cow’s udder. In the same way, Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has right view... and samādhi [based] on right view makes an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get

results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the right way, namely by the [right] path. Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has wrong view... and con centration [based] on wrong view makes an aspiration and wrongly prac tices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the wrong way, namely by what is not the [right] path. Bhūmija, it is just as a man who, wanting to get butter by filling a vessel with water and churning it, will certainly not get butter. If he [makes an aspiration... if he] does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration, wanting to get butter by filling a vessel with water and churning it, he will certainly not get butter. Why is that? He is seeking butter in the wrong way, namely by churning water. In the same way, Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has wrong view... and samādhi [based] on wrong view makes an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the wrong way, namely by what is not the [right] path. Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has right view... and concen tration [based] on right view, makes an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. If he does not make an aspiration

... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the right way, namely by the [right] path. Bhūmija, it is just as a man who, wanting to get butter by filling a vessel with cream and churning it, will certainly get butter. If he [makes an aspiration... if he] does not make an aspiration... if he both makes

an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration, wanting to get butter by filling a vessel with cream and churning it, then he will certainly get butter. Why is that? He is seeking butter in the right way, namely by churning cream. In the same way, Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has right view... and samādhi [based] on right view makes an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the right way, namely by the [right] path. Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has wrong view... and con- centration [based] on wrong view, makes an aspiration and wrongly prac- tices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results; if he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the wrong way, namely by what is not the [right] path. Bhūmija, it is just as a man who, wanting to get oil by filling a press with sand, sprinkling it with water, and then squeezing it, will certainly not get oil. If he [makes an aspiration... if he] does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he nei- ther makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration, wanting to get oil by filling a press with sand, sprinkling it with water, and then squeezing it, he will certainly not get oil. Why is that? He is seeking oil in the wrong way, namely by squeezing sand. In the same way, Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has wrong view... and samādhi [based] on wrong view makes an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will

certainly not get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the wrong way, namely by what is not the [right] path. Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has right view... and con centration [based] on right view, makes an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspi ration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the right way, namely by the [right] path. It is just as a man who, wanting to get oil by filling a press with sesame seed, sprinkling it with warm water, and squeezing it, will certainly get oil. If he [makes an aspiration... if he] does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration, wanting to get oil by filling a press with sesame seed, sprinkling it with warm water, and squeezing it, he will certainly get oil. Why is that? He is seeking oil in the right way, namely by squeezing sesame seed. In the same way, Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has right view... and samādhi [based] on right view, makes an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the right way, namely by the [right] path. Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has wrong view... and con centration [based] on wrong view, makes an aspiration and wrongly prac tices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the wrong way, namely by what is not the [right] path. Bhūmija, it is just as a man who, wanting to get fire by drilling a damp lower fire stick with a damp upper fire stick, will certainly not get fire. If

he [makes an aspiration... if he] he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration, wanting to get fire by drilling a damp lower fire stick with a damp upper fire stick, then he will certainly not get fire. Why is that? He is seeking fire in the wrong way, namely by drilling with damp sticks. In the same way, Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has wrong view... and samādhi [based] on wrong view, makes an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and wrongly practices the holy life, then he will certainly not get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the wrong way, namely by what is not the [right] path. Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has right view... and con- centration [based] on right view, makes an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspi- ration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the right way, namely by the [right] path. Bhūmija, it is just as a man who, wanting to get fire by drilling a dry lower fire stick with a dry upper fire stick, will certainly get fire. If he [makes an aspiration... if he] does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration, wanting to get fire by drilling a dry lower fire stick with a dry upper fire stick, then he will certainly get fire. Why is that? He is seeking fire in the right way, namely by drilling with dry sticks. In the same way, Bhūmija, if a renunciant or brahmin who has right view... and samādhi [based] on right view, makes an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly get results. If he does not make an aspiration... if he both makes an aspiration and does not make an aspiration... if he neither makes an aspiration nor does not make an aspiration and rightly practices the holy life, then he will certainly

get results. Why is that? He is seeking results in the right way, namely by the [right] path. Bhūmija, if you had spoken these four similes to the prince, on hearing them the prince would certainly have been greatly pleased and would have supported you for the whole of your life, that is, with robes and blan- kets, food and drink, beds and bedding, medicine, and the various other requisites of life. The venerable Bhūmija said: World-honored One, I had never before heard these four similes. How could I have spoken them? Only now have I heard them from the World- honored One. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Bhūmija and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma173-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN125]], [[SN12.25]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA173]]
> ◄  [[ma172-bdk]] 📜  [[ma174-bdk]] ►
