---
sutta_code: "MA189"
sutta_title:
  - "勝道 "
  - "Noble Path"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA189]]
> ◄  [[ma188-bdk]] 📜  [[ma190-bdk]] ►

### 189. The Discourse on the Noble Path

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling among the Kurus, in the Kuru town of Kammāsadhamma.

At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks:

There is one path whereby beings can achieve purification, free themselves from worry, sadness, and tears, eradicate dejection, suffering, remorse, and anxiety, and then attain the [right] method, namely noble right con- centration with its arising, its supports, and also with its accompaniment of seven factors.^41 Regarding noble right samādhi I shall explain its arising, its supports, and also its accompaniments. What are the seven [accompanying factors]? [They are] right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness. If, through the arising of these seven factors, supported [by them], and accompanied [by them], the mind progresses well and attains unification—this is what is meant by noble right samādhi with its arising, with its supports, and with its accompaniment. Why is that? From right view arises right intention, from right intention arises right speech, from right speech arises right action, from right action arises right livelihood, from right livelihood arises right effort, from right effort arises right mindfulness, and from right mindfulness arises right samādhi.^42 A noble disciple who has in this way rightly collected the mind will swiftly eradicate sexual desire, ill will, and delusion. A noble disciple who has in this way rightly liberated the mind swiftly comes to know: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” He comes to know this as it really is. Herein right view comes first. If one sees that wrong view is wrong view, then this is right view. If one sees that right view is right view, then this too is right view. What is wrong view? It is this view, “There is no [efficacy in] giving, there is no [efficacy in] offerings, there is no [efficacy in] reciting hymns, there are no whole- some or evil deeds, there are no results of wholesome or evil deeds, there is neither this world nor that world, there is no [obligation toward one’s] father or mother, in the world there are no arahants who have arrived at a wholesome attainment, who are well gone and have progressed well, and who dwell having by their own knowledge and experience realized for themselves this world and the other world”—this is wrong view.

What is right view? It is this view:^43 “There is [efficacy in] giving, there is [efficacy in] offerings, there is [efficacy in] reciting hymns, there are wholesome and evil deeds, there are results of wholesome and evil deeds, there are this world and that world, there is [obligation toward one’s] father and mother, in the world there are arahants who have arrived at a wholesome attainment, who are well gone and have progressed well, and who dwell having by their own knowledge and experience realized for themselves this world and the other world”—this is right view. To see that wrong view is wrong view—this is right view; and to see that right view is right view—this too is right view. Having understood it like this, one then strives in the training, wishing to abandon wrong view and to accomplish right view—this is right effort. Through mind fulness a monk abandons wrong view and accomplishes right view—this is right mindfulness. These three factors go together with right view, from view to effort. For this reason, right view comes first. If one sees that wrong intention is wrong intention—this is right <view>.^44 If one sees that right intention is right intention—this too is right <view>. What is wrong intention? Thoughts of sensuality, thoughts of ill will, thoughts of harming—this is wrong intention. What is right intention? Thoughts without sensuality, thoughts without ill will, thoughts of non harming—this is right intention. To see that wrong intention is wrong intention—this is right <view>; and to see that right intention is right intention—this too is right <view>. Having understood it like this, one then strives in the training, wishing to abandon wrong intention and to accomplish right intention—this is right effort. With mindfulness a monk abandons wrong intention and accomplishes right inten tion—this is right mindfulness. These three factors go together with right intention, from view to effort. For this reason, right view comes first. If one sees that wrong speech is wrong speech—this is right <view>. If one sees that right speech is right speech—this too is right <view>. What is wrong speech? False speech, divisive speech, harsh speech, and gossip—this is wrong speech. What is right speech? Abstention from false speech, from divisive speech, from harsh speech, and from gossip— this is right speech.

To see that wrong speech is wrong speech—this is right

To see that wrong livelihood is wrong livelihood—this is right <view>; and to see that right livelihood is right livelihood—this too is right <view>. Having understood it like this, one strives in the training, wishing to aban don wrong livelihood and to accomplish right livelihood—this is right effort. With mindfulness a monk abandons wrong livelihood and accom plishes right livelihood—this is right mindfulness. These three factors go together with right livelihood, from view to effort. For this reason, right view comes first. What is right effort?^45 For the abandoning of already arisen unwholesome states a monk cultivates ardor, puts forth energy, and is diligent in arousing the mind toward cessation. For the nonarising of not yet arisen unwholesome states he cultivates ardor, puts forth energy, and is diligent in arousing the mind toward cessation. For the arising of not yet arisen wholesome states he cultivates ardor, puts forth energy, and is diligent in arousing the mind toward cessation. For the stabilizing of already arisen wholesome states without loss or regress, for their increase and expansion, for their devel opment and full implementation, he cultivates ardor, puts forth energy, and is diligent in arousing the mind toward cessation. This is right effort. What is right mindfulness? A monk contemplates the body as a body internally, contemplates... up to... feelings... states of mind... dharmas as dharmas. This is right mindfulness. What is right samādhi? A monk, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states... up to... dwells having attained the fourth absorption. This is right samādhi. What is right liberation? A monk liberates the mind from sensuality... ill will... liberates the mind from delusion. This is right liberation. What is right knowledge? A monk knows that the mind has been lib erated from sensuality... from ill will, knows that the mind has been lib erated from delusion. This is right knowledge. The one in training is endowed with eight factors. The arahant, who has destroyed the taints, is endowed with ten factors. What are the eight factors with which the one in training is endowed? [They are] the right view of one in training... up to... the right con centration of one in training. These are the eight factors with which the one in training is endowed.

What are the ten factors with which the arahant, who has destroyed the taints, is endowed? [They are] the right view of one beyond training... up to... the right knowledge of one beyond training. These are the ten factors with which the arahant, who has destroyed the taints, is endowed. Why is this? One who has right view abandons wrong view, [and thereby] the count- less evil and unwholesome states that arise because of wrong view are abandoned and the countless wholesome states that arise because of right view are developed and brought to perfection... up to... one who has right knowledge abandons wrong knowledge, [and thereby] the countless evil and unwholesome states that arise because of wrong knowledge are abandoned, and the countless wholesome states that arise because of right knowledge are developed and brought to perfection.^46 These are twenty wholesome types and twenty unwholesome types. Hence this is spoken of as the teaching on the great forty types, which has set rolling the Brahmā wheel that cannot be stopped or contradicted by any renunciant or brahmin, _deva, māra,_ Brahmā, or anyone else in the world. If some renunciant or brahmin [attempts to stop or contradict] the teach- ing on the great forty types proclaimed by me, which has set rolling the Brahmā wheel that cannot be stopped or contradicted by any renunciant or brahmin, _deva, māra,_ Brahmā, or anyone else in the world, then they will incur ten kinds of censure in accordance with the Dharma. What are the ten? If [the renunciant or brahmin] condemns right view and commends wrong view, if they [in this way] support and commend renunciants and brahmins who have wrong view, and if they [in this way] contradict the teaching on the great forty types proclaimed by me, which has set rolling the Brahmā wheel that cannot be stopped by any renunciant or brahmin, _deva, māra,_ Brahmā, or by anyone else in the world—then they incur the first kind of censure in accordance with the Dharma. If some renunciant or brahmin condemns... up to... right knowledge and commends wrong knowledge, if they [in this way] support and com- mend renunciants and brahmins who have wrong knowledge, and if they [in this way] contradict the teaching on the great forty types proclaimed by me, which has set rolling the Brahmā wheel that cannot be stopped by any renunciant or brahmin, _deva, māra,_ Brahmā, or by anyone else in the

world—then they incur the tenth kind of censure in accordance with the Dharma. If some renunciant or brahmin [attempts to stop or contradict] the teach ing on the great forty types proclaimed by me, which has set rolling the Brahmā wheel that cannot be stopped or contradicted by any renunciant or brahmin, deva, māra, Brahmā, or by anyone else in the world, then [they will incur] these ten kinds of censure in accordance with the Dharma. Still other renunciants and brahmins, who [practice] squatting and pro claim [the practice of] squatting, who are nihilists and proclaim nihilism, who deny causality, deny action, deny karma, maintaining that whatever good or evil is done is cut off and destroyed then and there—if they con tradict the teaching on the great forty types proclaimed by me, which has set rolling the Brahmā wheel that cannot be stopped by any renunciant or brahmin, deva, māra, Brahmā, or by anyone else in the world, then they will be worried and fearful of also incurring censure. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma189-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA785]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[JA458]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN5.25]], [[AN5.28]], [[SN12.15]], [[SN45.1]], [[SN45.8]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA189]]
> ◄  [[ma188-bdk]] 📜  [[ma190-bdk]] ►
