---
sutta_code: "MA184"
sutta_title:
  - "梵天請佛 "
  - "Brahmā’s Invitation to the Buddha"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA184]]
> ◄  [[ma183-bdk]] 📜  [[ma185-bdk]] ►

### 184. The Discourse in the Gosiṅga Sāla Forest (1)

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha, who was dwelling among the Vajjians, was staying in the Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest together with many knowl- edgeable elder monks, senior disciples such as the venerable Sāriputta, the venerable Mahāmoggallāna, the venerable Mahākassapa, the venerable Mahākaccāna, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Revata, and the ven- erable Ānanda.^15 Monks such as these knowledgeable elder monks, these senior disciples, were also dwelling among the Vajjians, staying in the Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest, dwelling together in the vicinity of the Buddha’s thatched hut. Then, when the night was [nearly] over, toward dawn, the venerable Mahā- moggallāna, the venerable Mahākassapa, the venerable Mahākaccāna and the venerable Anuruddha went towards where the venerable Sāriputta was. The venerable Ānanda saw from afar those venerable ones going there. He said:

Venerable Revata, you should know that, the night being [nearly] over and dawn approaching, the venerable Mahāmoggallāna, the venerable Mahākassapa, the venerable Mahākaccāna, and the venerable Anuruddha are going toward where the venerable Sāriputta is. Venerable Revata, let

us go with those venerable ones and together approach the venerable Sāriputta. Perhaps we might, on account of them, get to hear a little Dharma from the venerable Sāriputta. Then, the night being [nearly] over, toward dawn, the venerable Mahā- moggallāna, the venerable Mahākassapa, the venerable Mahākaccāna, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Revata, and the venerable Ānanda approached the venerable Sāriputta. The venerable Sāriputta saw from afar that those venerable ones had come. On account of those venerable ones, the venerable Sāriputta said: Welcome, venerable friends! Welcome, Ānanda! Welcome, Ānanda, attendant of the World-honored One, who understands the intentions of the World-honored One and is constantly praised by the World-honored One and by his companions in the holy life. Let me now ask the venerable Ānanda, “This Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the _sāla_ trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Ānanda, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest?” The venerable Ānanda replied: Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk is widely trained in learning much, has retained it without forgetting [anything], having accumulated extensive learning of that which is called the Dharma, which is sublime in the begin- ning, sublime in the middle, and also sublime in the end, with its meaning and its phrasing, endowed with purity, revealing the holy life. Being thus widely trained in learning much of all the teachings, having studied and reviewed them by the thousand, reflected on them, and con- templated them with bright vision and penetrative realization, he teaches the Dharma concisely, aptly, and skillfully, in accordance with what is cor- rect, wishing to cut through the fetters [of his hearers]. Venerable Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest. The venerable Sāriputta asked further: Venerable Revata, the venerable monk Ānanda has spoken according to his understanding. Let me now ask the venerable Revata: This Gosiṅga _sāla_

forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the _sāla_ trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Revata, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest?

The venerable Revata replied:

Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk delights in sitting in meditation, practices inner stillness and, while not neglecting the practice of [concen- trative] meditation, accomplishes insight, and always prefers to live in seclusion and enjoys peaceful places. Venerable Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest.

The venerable Sāriputta asked further:

Venerable Anuruddha, the venerable monk Revata has spoken according to his understanding. Let me now ask the venerable Anuruddha, “This Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the _sāla_ trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Anuruddha, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest?”

The venerable Anuruddha replied:

Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk attains the divine eye, accomplishes the divine eye [so that] with little effort he completely surveys in an instant a thousand worlds. Venerable Sāriputta, it is just as a man with [good] eyesight could, from the top of a lofty building, with little effort completely survey in an instant a thousand clay bricks on the ground below.^16 In the same way, Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk attains the divine eye, accomplishes the divine eye [so that] with little effort he completely surveys in an instant a thousand worlds. Venerable Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest.

The venerable Sāriputta asked further:

Venerable Kaccāna, the venerable monk Anuruddha has spoken according to his understanding. Let me now ask the venerable Kaccāna, “This Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the _sāla_ trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers.

Venerable Kaccāna, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla forest?” The venerable Mahākaccāna replied: Venerable Sāriputta, suppose two monks, who are Dharma teachers, discuss together the profound aspects of the higher Dharma, such that whatever matter they ask [each other] about, they understand it well and know it completely, replying without hesitation and eloquently expounding the Dharma. Venerable Sāriputta, such monks would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla forest.^17 The venerable Sāriputta asked further: Venerable Mahākassapa, the venerable monk Kaccāna has spoken accord ing to his understanding. Let me now ask the venerable Mahākassapa, “This Gosiṅga sāla forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the sāla trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Mahākassapa, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla forest?” The venerable Mahākassapa replied: Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk is himself a forest-dweller and praises forest-dwelling, is himself of few wishes and praises being of few wishes, is himself contented and praises contentment, himself stays alone and in seclusion and praises staying alone and in seclusion, himself practices ener getically and praises practicing energetically, himself establishes right mind fulness and right comprehension and praises establishing right mindfulness and right comprehension, has himself attained samādhi and praises the attainment of samādhi, himself has wisdom and praises having wisdom, has himself eradicated the taints and praises the eradication of the taints, himself exhorts and inspires [others], fully delighting them, and praises exhorting and inspiring [others], fully delighting them.^18 Venerable Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla forest. The venerable Sāriputta asked further: Venerable Moggallāna, the venerable monk Mahākassapa has spoken

according to his understanding. Let me now ask the venerable Moggallāna, “This Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the _sāla_ trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Moggallāna, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest?”

The venerable Mahāmoggallāna replied:

Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk has great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power, possessing at will immeasurable supernormal power. Practicing immeasurable supernormal powers, being one he transforms himself into many; being many, he becomes one. Being one he remains as one, possessing knowledge and vision. He passes unhindered through stone walls as if passing through space. He dives into the earth as if it were water; he walks on water without sinking as if it were earth. Seated cross-legged, he ascends into space like a bird. With his hands he touches and strokes the sun and the moon, which are of such great supernormal power, of such great and mighty virtue, of such great merit, of such great and mighty power. With his [mental] body he can reach the Brahmā world.^19 Venerable Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest.

The venerable Mahāmoggallāna said:

Venerable Sāriputta, I and these venerable ones have spoken, each accord- ing to his understanding. Let me now ask the venerable Sāriputta, “This Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the _sāla_ trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Sāriputta, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest?”

The venerable Sāriputta said:

Venerable Moggallāna, suppose a monk has, at will, mastery over his mind and is not mastered by his mind. Whichever tranquil abiding he wishes to attain in the forenoon, he dwells in that tranquil abiding in the forenoon; whichever tranquil abiding he wishes to attain at noon or in the afternoon, he dwells in that tranquil abiding at noon or in the afternoon.

Venerable Moggallāna, it is just like a king or a king’s minister who has many garments, different clothes of various beautiful colors, so that whatever he desires to wear in the forenoon, he takes it and puts it on, and whatever he desires to wear at noon or in the afternoon, he takes it and puts it on. In the same way, Venerable Moggallāna, suppose a monk has, at will, mastery over his mind and is not mastered by his mind. Whichever tranquil abiding he wishes to attain in the forenoon, he dwells in that tranquil abid- ing in the forenoon; whichever tranquil abiding he wishes to attain at noon or in the afternoon, he dwells in that tranquil abiding at noon or in the afternoon. Venerable Moggallāna, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest. The venerable Sāriputta said: Venerable Moggallāna, we and these venerable ones have spoken, each according to our understanding. Venerable Moggallāna, let us, together with these venerable ones, approach the Buddha and discuss this matter with him. He will know who among us has spoken the best. Then the venerable Sāriputta, the venerable Mahāmoggallāna, the venerable Mahākassapa, the venerable Mahākaccāna, the venerable Anuruddha, the ven- erable Revata, and the venerable Ānanda approached the Buddha. The other venerable ones paid homage with their heads at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat down to one side, while the venerable Ānanda paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and stood to one side. The venerable Sāriputta said: World-honored One, today, the night being [nearly] over, toward dawn, the venerable Mahāmoggallāna, the venerable Mahākassapa, the venerable Kaccāna, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Revata, and the venerable Ānanda came and approached me. Having seen from afar that those ven- erable ones had come, I said, on account of those venerable ones, “Wel- come, venerable friends! Welcome, Ānanda! Welcome, Ānanda, attendant of the World-honored One, who understands the intentions of the World- honored One and is constantly praised by the World-honored One and by his companions in the holy life.

“Now let me ask the venerable Ānanda, ‘This Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the _sāla_ trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Ānanda, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest?’ “The venerable Ānanda answered me, saying, ‘Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk is widely trained in learning much, has retained it without forgetting [anything], accumulated extensive learning of that which is called the Dharma, which is sublime in the beginning, sublime in the mid- dle, and also sublime in the end, with its meaning and its phrasing, endowed with purity, revealing the holy life. ‘Being thus widely trained in learning much of all the teachings, having studied and reviewed them by the thousand, reflected on them, and con- templated them with bright vision and penetrative realization, he teaches the Dharma concisely, aptly, and skillfully, in accordance with what is correct, wishing to cut through the fetters [of his hearers]. Venerable Sāri - putta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest.’” The World-honored One praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, Sāriputta, it is indeed as the monk Ānanda said. Why is that? The monk Ānanda has accomplished much learning.” The venerable Sāriputta said: World-honored One, when the venerable Ānanda had spoken thus, I asked further, “Venerable Revata, the venerable monk Ānanda has spoken according to his understanding. I now ask the venerable Revata, ‘This Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the _sāla_ trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Revata, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest?’ “The venerable Revata answered me, saying, ‘Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk delights in sitting in meditation, practices inner stillness and, while not neglecting the practice of [concentrative] meditation, accom- plishes insight, and always prefers to live in seclusion and enjoys peaceful places. Venerable Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest.’” The World-honored One praised him, saying:

It is well, it is well, Sāriputta, it is indeed as the monk Revata said. Why is that? The monk Revata always delights in the practice of [concentrative] meditation. The venerable Sāriputta said: World-honored One, when the venerable Revata had spoken thus, I asked further, “Venerable Anuruddha, the venerable monk Revata has spoken according to his understanding. I now ask the venerable Anuruddha, ‘This Gosiṅga sāla forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the sāla trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Revata, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla forest?’ “The venerable Anuruddha answered me, saying, ‘Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk attains the divine eye, accomplishes the divine eye [so that] with little effort he completely surveys in an instant a thousand worlds. Venerable Sāriputta, just as a man with [good] eyesight could, from the top of a lofty building, with little effort completely survey in an instant a thousand clay bricks on the ground below, in the same way, ven erable Sāriputta, suppose a monk attains the divine eye, accomplishes the divine eye [so that] with little effort he completely surveys in an instant a thousand worlds. Venerable Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla forest.’” The World-honored One praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, Sāriputta, it is indeed as the monk Anuruddha said. Why is that? The monk Anuruddha has attained the divine eye.” The venerable Sāriputta said: World-honored One, when the venerable Anuruddha had spoken thus, I asked further, “Venerable Kaccāna, the venerable monk Anuruddha has spoken according to his understanding. Let me now ask the venerable Kaccāna, ‘This Gosiṅga sāla forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the sāla trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Kaccāna, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla forest?’

“The venerable Kaccāna answered me, saying, ‘Venerable Sāriputta, suppose two monks, who are Dharma teachers, discuss together the pro- found aspects of the higher Dharma, such that whatever matter they ask [each other] about, they understand it well and know it completely, replying without hesitation and eloquently expounding the Dharma. Venerable Sāriputta, such monks would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest.’” The World-honored One praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, Sāriputta, it is indeed as the monk Kaccāna said. Why is that? The monk Kaccāna is a teacher of the Dharma by way of analysis.” The venerable Sāriputta said: World-honored One, when the venerable Kaccāna had spoken thus, I asked further, “Venerable Mahākassapa, the venerable monk Kaccāna has spoken according to his understanding. Let me now ask the venerable Mahā - kassapa, ‘This Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the _sāla_ trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Mahākassapa, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest?’ “The venerable Mahākassapa answered me, saying, ‘Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk is himself a forest-dweller and praises forest- dwelling, is himself of few wishes and praises being of few wishes, is himself contented and praises contentment, himself stays alone and in seclusion and praises staying alone and in seclusion, himself practices energetically and praises practicing energetically, himself establishes right mindfulness and right comprehension and praises establishing right mind- fulness and right comprehension, has himself attained samādhi and praises attainment of samādhi, himself has wisdom and praises having wisdom, has himself eradicated the taints and praises eradication of the taints, himself exhorts and inspires [others], fully delighting them, and praises exhorting and inspiring [others], fully delighting them. Venerable Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest.’” The World-honored One praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, Sāriputta, it is indeed as the monk Kassapa said. Why is that? The monk Kassapa always practices forest-dwelling.”

The venerable Sāriputta said: World-honored One, when the venerable Mahākassapa had spoken like this, I asked further, “Venerable Moggallāna, the venerable monk Mahākas sapa has spoken according to his understanding. Let me now ask the ven erable Moggallāna, ‘This Gosiṅga sāla forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the sāla trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Moggallāna, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla forest?’ “The venerable Mahāmoggallāna answered me, saying, ‘Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a monk has great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great and mighty power, possessing at will immeasurable supernormal power. Being one he transforms himself into many; being many, he becomes one. Being one he remains as one, possessing knowledge and vision. He passes unhindered through stone walls as if passing through space. He dives into the earth as if it were water; he walks on water without sinking as if it were earth. Seated cross-legged, he ascends into space like a bird. With his hands he touches and strokes the sun and the moon, which are of such great supernormal power, of such great and mighty virtue, of such great merit, of such great and mighty power. With his [mental] body he can reach as far as the Brahmā world. Venerable Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla forest.’” The World-honored One praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, Sāriputta, it is indeed as the monk Moggallāna said. Why is that? The monk Moggallāna has great supernormal power.” Then the venerable Mahāmoggallāna rose from his seat, arranged his robes so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said: World-honored One, when I and these venerable ones had spoken, each according to his understanding, I in turn asked the venerable Sāriputta, “Let me now ask the venerable Sāriputta, ‘This Gosiṅga sāla -forest is truly delightful, the night is brightly moonlit, and the sāla trees are spreading a delicate fragrance, as if from divine flowers. Venerable Sāriputta, what kind of monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga sāla -forest?’

“The venerable Sāriputta answered me, saying, ‘Venerable Moggallāna, suppose a monk has, at will, mastery over his mind and is not mastered by his mind. Whichever tranquil abiding he wishes to attain in the forenoon, he dwells in that tranquil abiding in the forenoon; whichever tranquil abid- ing he wishes to attain at noon or in the afternoon, he dwells in that tranquil abiding at noon or in the afternoon. “‘Venerable Moggallāna, it is just like a king or a king’s minister who has many garments, different clothes of various beautiful colors, so that whatever he desires to wear in the forenoon, he takes it and puts it on, and whatever he desires to wear at noon or in the afternoon, he takes it and puts it on. “‘In the same way, Venerable Moggallāna, suppose a monk has, at will, mastery over his mind and is not mastered by his mind. Whichever tranquil abiding he wishes to attain in the forenoon, he dwells in that tranquil abid- ing in the forenoon; whichever tranquil abiding he wishes to attain at noon or in the afternoon, he dwells in that tranquil abiding at noon or in the afternoon. Venerable Moggallāna, such a monk would further enhance this Gosiṅga _sāla_ forest.’” The World-honored One praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, Mog- gallāna, it is indeed as the monk Sāriputta said. Why is that? The monk Sāriputta has, at will, mastery over his mind.” Then the venerable Sāriputta rose from his seat, arranged his robes so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said:

World-honored One, when I and these venerable ones had spoken thus accord ing to our understanding, I said, “Venerable Moggallāna, we and these ven erable ones have spoken, each according to his understanding. Venerable Moggallāna, let us together with these other venerable ones approach the Buddha and ask him about this matter. He will know who among us has spo ken the best.” World-honored One, who among us has spoken well? The World-honored One replied: Sāriputta, you have all [spoken] well. Why is that? All these [modes of]

the Dharma are entirely as spoken by me. Sāriputta, listen as I declare what kind of monk would further enhance the Gosiṅga sāla forest. Sāriputta, suppose a monk dwells in dependence on a town or village. When the night is over, toward dawn, he puts on his [outer] robe and takes his bowl and enters the village to beg for almsfood, guarding his body well, restraining his faculties well, with mindfulness well established. Having begged for almsfood and after having partaken of the midday meal, he puts away his [outer] robe and bowl, washes his hands and feet and, with a sitting mat over his shoulder, goes into the forest, or to the base of a tree, or to an empty quiet place. He spreads his sitting mat and sits down cross-legged [with this inten tion]: “I shall not rise from this cross-legged sitting posture until the taints have been eradicated.” And he indeed does not rise from his cross-legged sitting posture until the taints have been eradicated. Sāriputta, such a monk would further enhance the Gosiṅga sāla forest. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, those monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma184-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA37.3]] |  |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA184]]
> ◄  [[ma183-bdk]] 📜  [[ma185-bdk]] ►
