---
sutta_code: "MA191"
sutta_title:
  - "真人 "
  - "True Person"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA191]]
> ◄  [[ma190-bdk]] 📜  [[ma192-bdk]] ►

### 191. The Greater Discourse on Emptiness

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu, in the Nigrodha Park. At that time, when the night was over, toward dawn, the World-honored One put on his [outer] robe, took his bowl, and entered Kapilavatthu to beg for almsfood. After having partaken of the midday meal, he went to the dwelling of Kāḷakhemaka the Sakyan. At that time in the dwelling of Kāḷakhemaka the Sakyan numerous beds and seats had been set out, [indicating that] many monks were staying there. Then, the World-honored One came out of the dwelling of Kāḷakhemaka the Sakyan and went to the dwelling of Ghāṭa the Sakyan. At that time the venerable Ānanda and many monks had congregated in the dwelling of Ghāṭa the Sakyan to make robes. The venerable Ānanda saw from afar that the Buddha was coming. Having seen this, he came out to receive the Buddha, took his [outer] robe and bowl, and returned to prepare a seat and draw water for washing his feet.^54 When the Buddha had washed his feet and sat down on the seat prepared by the venerable Ānanda in the dwelling of Ghāṭa the Sakyan, he said, “Ānanda, in the dwelling of Kāḷakhe- maka the Sakyan numerous beds and seats have been set out, [indicating that] many monks are staying there.” The venerable Ānanda said: Yes, indeed, World-honored One, in the dwelling of Kāḷakhemaka the Sakyan numerous beds and seats have been set out, [indicating that] many monks are staying there. Why is that? We are now making robes. Then, the World-honored One told Ānanda:

A monk should not desire clamorous talk, delight in clamorous talk, asso ciate with clamorous talk, desire company, delight in company, associate with company, not desiring to be separated from company, not delighting in dwelling alone in remote places. If a monk desires clamorous talk, delights in clamorous talk, associates with clamorous talk, desires company, delights in company, associates with company, not desiring to be separated from company, not delighting in dwelling alone in remote places, then it is impossible for him to attain, easily and without difficulty, that which is called happiness: noble hap piness, the happiness of dispassion, the happiness of separation, the hap piness of stillness, the happiness [that leads to] full awakening, the non worldly happiness, the happiness [that is not affected by] birth and death. Ānanda, if a monk does not desire clamorous talk, does not delight in clamorous talk, does not associate with clamorous talk, does not desire company, does not delight in company, does not associate with company, desiring to be separated from company, constantly delighting in dwelling alone in remote places, then it is certainly possible for him to attain, easily and without difficulty, that which is called happiness: noble happiness, the happiness of dispassion, the happiness of separation, the happiness of stillness, the happiness [that leads to] full awakening, the nonworldly happiness, the happiness [that is not affected by] birth and death. Ānanda, a monk should not desire clamorous talk, delight in clamorous talk, associate with clamorous talk, desire company, delight in company, and associate with company, not desiring to be separated from company, not delighting in dwelling alone in remote places. If a monk desires clam orous talk, delights in clamorous talk, associates with clamorous talk, desires company, delights in company, and associates with company, not desiring to be separated from company, not delighting in dwelling alone in remote places, then it is impossible for him to attain either the temporary liberation of the mind that is delightful or the permanent liberation of the mind that is unshakeable. Ānanda, if a monk does not desire clamorous talk, does not delight in clamorous talk, does not associate with clamorous talk, does not desire company, does not delight in company, and does not associate with com pany, desiring to be separated from company, constantly delighting in

dwelling alone in remote places, then it is certainly possible for him to attain either the temporary liberation of the mind that is delightful or the permanent liberation of the mind that is unshakeable. Why is that? I do not see a single form that I might desire or delight in, since with the decay and change of that form there would at some time arise sorrow and lamentation, sadness, suffering, and vexation. For this reason, I fully and completely awoke to this other abiding, namely dwelling in emptiness externally by transcending all perception of form.^55 Ānanda, when I dwell in this abiding, there arises joy. I experience this joy throughout the whole body with right mindfulness and right compre- hension. There arises rapture... there arises tranquility... there arises hap- piness... there arises samādhi. I experience this samādhi throughout the whole body with right mindfulness and right comprehension. Ānanda, there may be monks, nuns, male lay disciples, or female lay disciples who together come to see me. Then, behaving in such a way toward them, being in such a mental state, secluded and delighting in dis- passion, I teach them the Dharma to encourage and help them. Ānanda, if a monk wishes to dwell much in emptiness, then that monk should keep the mind established in inner tranquility so that it becomes unified and collected. Having kept the mind established in inner tran- quility so that it becomes unified and collected, he should attend to internal emptiness. Ānanda, if a monk speaks like this, “Without keeping the mind estab- lished in inner tranquility so that it becomes unified and collected, I attend to internal emptiness,” you should know that that monk is making great trouble for himself.^56 Ānanda, how does a monk keep the mind established in inner tranquility so that it becomes unified and collected? A monk completely drenches and pervades this body with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion [expe- rienced in the first absorption], so that no part [of his body] is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.^57 Ānanda, it is just as a person taking a bath, having placed bath powder in a vessel, might sprinkle it with water and knead it into a ball, so that every bit of it, inside and out, is completely drenched and pervaded with the water, with none seeping out.

In the same way, Ānanda, a monk completely drenches and pervades his body with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, so that there is no part [of his body] that is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. Ānanda, in this way a monk should keep the mind established in inner tranquility so that it becomes unified and collected. Keeping the mind established in inner tranquility so that it becomes unified and collected, he should attend to internal emptiness. [It may happen that], having attended to internal emptiness, his mind is perturbed, does not advance and progress, does not attain purity, is not established, and is not released by internal emptiness. Ānanda, if while contemplating, a monk comes to know that on attend ing to internal emptiness his mind is perturbed, does not advance and progress, does not attain purity, is not established, and is not released by internal emptiness, then that monk should attend to external emptiness. [It may happen that], having attended to external emptiness, his mind is perturbed, does not advance and progress, does not attain purity, is not established, and is not released by external emptiness. Ānanda, if while contemplating, a monk comes to know that on attend ing to external emptiness his mind is perturbed, does not advance and progress, does not attain purity, is not established, and is not released by external emptiness, then that monk should attend to internal and external emptiness. [It may happen that], having attended to internal and external emptiness, his mind is perturbed, does not advance and progress, does not attain purity, is not established, and is not released by internal and external emptiness. Ānanda, if while contemplating a monk comes to know that, on attend ing to internal and external emptiness, his mind is perturbed, does not advance and progress, does not attain purity, is not established, and not released by internal and external emptiness, then that monk should attend to imperturbability. [It may happen that], having attended to imperturba bility, his mind is perturbed, does not advance and progress, does not attain purity, is not established, and is not released by imperturbability. Ānanda, if while contemplating, a monk comes to know that on attending to imperturbability his mind is perturbed, does not advance and progress,

does not attain purity, is not established, and is not released by imperturba- bility, then that monk should repeatedly direct his mind to this or that con- centration,^58 repeatedly practice it, repeatedly soften [the mind] so that it becomes joyful and tender, absorbed in the pleasure of seclusion. Repeatedly directing his mind to this or that samādhi, repeatedly practicing it, repeatedly softening [the mind], so that it becomes joyful and tender, absorbed in the pleasure of seclusion, he should accomplish dwelling in internal emptiness. Having accomplished dwelling in internal emptiness, the mind becomes imperturbable, advances and progresses, attains purity, is established, and is released by internal emptiness. Ānanda, if while contemplating a monk comes to know that he has accom- plished dwelling in internal emptiness, that the mind has become imper- turbable, advances and progresses, attains purity, is established, and is released by internal emptiness—then this is right comprehension. Ānanda, the monk should then accomplish dwelling in external empti- ness. Having accomplished dwelling in external emptiness, the mind becomes imperturbable, advances and progresses, attains purity, is estab- lished, and is released by external emptiness. Ānanda, if while contemplating a monk comes to know that he has accomplished dwelling in external emptiness, that the mind has become imperturbable, advances and progresses, attains purity, is established, and is released by external emptiness—then this is right comprehension. Ānanda, the monk should then accomplish dwelling in internal and exter- nal emptiness. Having accomplished dwelling in internal and external empti- ness, the mind becomes imperturbable, advances and progresses, attains purity, is established, and is released by internal and external emptiness. Ānanda, if while contemplating a monk comes to know that he has accomplished dwelling in internal and external emptiness, that the mind has become imperturbable, advances and progresses, attains purity, is established, and is released by internal and external emptiness—then this is right comprehension. Ānanda, he should then accomplish dwelling in imperturbability. Having accomplished dwelling in imperturbability, the mind becomes imper- turbable, advances and progresses, attains purity, is established, and is released by imperturbability.

Ānanda, if while contemplating, a monk comes to know that he has accomplished dwelling in imperturbability, that the mind has become imperturbable, advances and progresses, attains purity, is established, and is released by imperturbability—then this is right comprehension. Ānanda, if a monk who is dwelling in this tranquil mental abiding wishes to practice walking meditation, then that monk goes out of his meditation hut and practices walking meditation in the open in the shade of the hut, with his faculties established within, the mind not directed outward or backward but perceiving [only] what is in front. After practicing walking meditation like this, his mind does not give rise to covetousness, sadness, or any [other] evil or unwholesome state. This is right comprehension. Ānanda, if a monk who is dwelling in this tranquil mental abiding wishes to sit in samādhi, then that monk leaves off the walking med itation, goes to the end of the walking meditation path, spreads his sitting mat, and sits down cross-legged. After having sat in samādhi like this, the mind does not give rise to covetousness, sadness, or any [other] evil or unwholesome state. This is right comprehension.^59 Ānanda, if a monk who is dwelling in this tranquil mental abiding wishes to think thoughts, then that monk should not think any of the three evil and unwholesome [types of] thought: thoughts of sensual desire, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of harming, these three evil and unwhole some [types of] thought. [Instead] he should think any of the three whole some [types of] thought: thoughts of desirelessness, thoughts of non-ill will, and thoughts of nonharming, these three wholesome [types of] thought. After he has been thinking like this, his mind does not give rise to covetousness, sadness, or any [other] evil or unwholesome state. This is right comprehension.^60 Ānanda, if a monk who is dwelling in this tranquil abiding wishes to speak, then that monk does not talk ignoble talk related to what is not beneficial, such as talk about kings, talk about thieves, talk about battles and quarrels, talk about food and drink, talk about robes, talk about married women, talk about girls, talk about adulterous women, talk about the world, talk about wrong practices, talk about what is in the ocean—he does not talk such types of irrelevant talk.

[Instead] he talks noble talk that is related to what is beneficial, that makes the mind malleable, free of darkness and hindrances, such as talk about giving, talk about morality, talk about samādhi, talk about wis- dom, talk about liberation, talk about knowledge and vision of liberation, talk about self-effacement, talk about not socializing, talk about fewness of desires, talk about contentment, talk about dispassion, talk about aban- doning, talk about extinction, talk about sitting in meditation, talk about dependent arising—such talk of renunciants. After he has been talking like this, his mind does not give rise to covetousness, sadness, or any [other] evil or unwholesome state. This is right comprehension. Again, Ānanda, there are the five strands of sensual pleasure, which are pleasurable, thought about by the mind, of desirable appearance, and connected with sensual desire, [namely]: visible forms known by the eye, sounds known by the ear, odors known by the nose, flavors known by the tongue, and tangibles known by the body. If a monk’s mind turns to con- template these five strands of sensual pleasure, if he comes under the influ- ence of these strands of sensual pleasure, then his mind may dwell on them. Why is that? Sooner or later, in regard to these five strands of sensual pleasure, one comes under the influence of these strands of sensual pleasure, and the mind dwells on them. Ānanda, if a monk, while contemplating these five strands of sensual pleasure, comes to know that he has come under the influence of these strands of sensual pleasure and that his mind is dwelling on them, then that monk should contemplate these various strands of sensual pleasure as impermanent, contemplate their decay, contemplate their fading away, contemplate their cutting off, contemplate their cessation, contemplate abandoning them, giving them up, and separating from them. Then, what- ever he has of desire and defilement regarding these five strands of sensual pleasure will cease. Ānanda, if while contemplating like this, a monk knows that whatever he had of desire and defilement in regard to these five strands of sensual pleasure has been made to cease, this is right comprehension. Again, Ānanda, there are the five aggregates affected by clinging. The material form aggregate affected by clinging... feeling... perception... formations and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.

The monk should contemplate their rise and fall thus: “This is material form, this is the arising of material form, this is the cessation of material form, this is feeling... perception... formations... this is consciousness, this is the arising of consciousness, this is the cessation of consciousness.” Then, whatever conceit of an “I” he has in regard to these five aggregates affected by clinging, that will cease. Ānanda, if while contemplating thus the monk comes to know that whatever conceit of an “I” he had in regard to these five aggregates affected by clinging has ceased—this is right comprehension. Ānanda, this Dharma is entirely desirable, entirely delightful, entirely [worth] thinking about.^61 It is without taints, without clinging, beyond the reach of Māra, beyond the reach of the Evil One, beyond the reach of all evil and unwholesome states that defile and are the root of future becoming, that result in vexation and suffering, and that are the cause of birth, old age, disease, and death. This is accomplishment in diligence. Why is that? It is through diligence that all tathāgatas, free from attachment, fully awakened, attained awakening. Through the faculty of diligence there arise the innumerable wholesome states that are in accordance with the factors of the path. Ānanda, for this reason you should train thus: “I will accomplish diligence”—thus you should train. Ānanda, for what reason do faithful disciples follow the World-honored One and respect him until the end of their lives? The venerable Ānanda said to the World-honored One: The World-honored One is the root of the Dharma, the World-honored One is the master of the Dharma, the Dharma comes from the World-hon ored One. May he explain it! Having heard it, we will fully understand its meaning. The Buddha said, “Ānanda, listen closely and pay proper attention. I will explain it to you in detail.” The venerable Ānanda listened to receive the teaching. The Buddha said: Ānanda, a faithful disciple does not follow the World-honored One and respect him until the end of his life for the sake of discourses, stanzas, or

expositions, even though, Ānanda, it may be that he has heard those teach- ings repeatedly over a long period, recited and reviewed them up to a thousand [times], contemplating them in the mind with knowledge, vision, and profound penetration. Consider talk that is noble talk, related to what is beneficial, which makes the mind malleable, free from all darkness and the hindrances— namely talk about giving, talk about morality, talk about samādhi, talk about wisdom, talk about liberation, talk about knowledge and vision of liberation, talk about self-effacement, talk about not socializing, talk about fewness of desires, talk about contentment, talk about dispassion, talk about abandoning, talk about extinction, talk about sitting in meditation, talk about dependent arising—on account of getting, easily and without difficulty, such talk of renunciants, for this a faithful disciple follows the World-honored One and respects him until the end of their life. Ānanda, in the following ways there is trouble for a teacher, trouble for a disciple, and trouble for [a practitioner of] the holy life. Ānanda, what is trouble for a teacher? Suppose there appears in the world a teacher whose approach is by way of thinking and reflection. Estab- lished in the approach by way of thinking, he reflects and contemplates separation, being a worldling [but] possessing discernment. He stays in a forest, under a tree in a mountain grove, or he dwells on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to seated meditation. It may be that, staying in that place and training energetically in seclusion, he attains a higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present. Having trained energetically in seclusion, having attained peace and happiness, he later gets a following of disciples—brahmins, householders, people from villages, towns, and countries. Having later got a following of disciples—brahmins, householders, people from villages, towns, and countries—he becomes conceited and [in the end] returns to the household life. Such is trouble for a teacher. Evil and unwholesome states, which defile and are the root of future becoming, which result in vexation and suffering, which are the cause of birth, old age, disease, and death—by these he is troubled. This is what is meant by trouble for a teacher.

Ānanda, what is trouble for a disciple? A disciple of that teacher trains in seclusion. He stays in a forest, under a tree in a mountain grove, or he dwells on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to seated meditation. It may be that, staying in that place and training ener getically in seclusion, he attains a higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present. Having trained energetically in seclusion, having attained peace and happiness, he later gets a following of disciples—brahmins, householders, people from villages, towns, and countries. Having later got a following of disciples—brahmins, householders, people from villages, towns, and coun tries—he becomes conceited and [in the end] returns to the household life. Such is trouble for a disciple. Evil and unwholesome states, which defile and are the root of future becoming, which result in vexation and suffering, which are the cause of birth, old age, disease, and death—by these he is troubled. This is what is meant by trouble for a disciple. Ānanda, what is trouble for [a practitioner of] the holy life? Suppose that a tathāgata appears in the world, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, a leader on the path of Dharma, a teacher of deva s and human beings, a buddha, an exalted one. He stays in a forest, under a tree in a mountain grove, or he dwells on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to seated meditation. Ānanda, for what reason would a tathāgata stay in a forest, under a tree in a mountain grove, or dwell on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no peo ple, a place conducive to seated meditation?^62 The venerable Ānanda said to the World-honored One: The World-honored One is the root of the Dharma, the World-honored One is the master of the Dharma, the Dharma comes from the World-hon ored One. May he explain it! Having heard it, we will fully understand its meaning.

The Buddha said, “Ānanda, listen closely and pay proper attention. I will now explain it to you in detail.” The venerable Ānanda listened to receive the teaching. The Buddha said: Ānanda, it is not because the Tathāgata wishes to attain what he has not yet attained, wishes to gain what he has not yet gained, wishes to realize what he has not yet realized, that he stays in a forest, under a tree in a mountain grove, or dwells on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to seated meditation. Ānanda, for two reasons the Tathāgata stays in a forest, under a tree in a mountain grove, or dwells on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to seated meditation. The first is because it is a happy abiding for himself in the present; the second is because he has compassion for people of later generations, [thinking], “Perhaps people of later gen- erations will follow the example of the Tathāgata and stay in a forest, under a tree in a mountain grove, or dwell on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to seated meditation.” Ānanda, for these reasons the Tathāgata stays in a forest, under a tree in a mountain grove, or dwells on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to seated meditation. It may be that, staying in that place and training energetically in seclu- sion, [a person of a later generation] will attain a higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present. Having trained energetically in seclusion, having attained peace and happiness, he later gets a following of [prac- titioners of] the holy life—monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples. Having afterward gotten a following of [practitioners of] the holy life—monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples— he does not become conceited and does not return to the household life. Ānanda, if he has realized imperturbable liberation of the mind, I do not say that there is any obstacle for him. [But] if, despite having formerly

practiced energetically and with diligence, he had attained [only] the four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present, then it is possible that he loses this [attainment] because of much association with disciples.^63 Again, Ānanda, a disciple of that teacher follows his example by staying in a forest, under a tree in a mountain grove, or dwelling on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to seated meditation. It may be that, staying in that place and training energetically in seclusion, he attains a higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present. Having trained energetically in seclusion, having attained peace and happiness, he later gets a following of [practitioners of] the holy life— monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples. Having later got a following of [practitioners of] the holy life—monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples—he becomes conceited and [in the end] returns to the household life. Such is trouble for [a practitioner of] the holy life. Evil and unwholesome states, which defile and are the root of future becoming, which result in vexation and suffering, which are the cause of birth, old age, disease, and death—by these he is troubled. This is what is meant by trouble for [a practitioner of] the holy life. Ānanda, compared with trouble for a teacher and trouble for a disciple, this trouble for [a practitioner of] the holy life is the most disagreeable, displeasing, and undesirable, it is most unthinkable. Ānanda, for this reason you should all behave toward me with loving-kindness. Do not behave with resentment. Ānanda, how do disciples behave toward their teacher with resentment and not with loving-kindness? Suppose that the venerable teacher speaks to his disciples on the Dharma out of sympathy and concern, seeking their ben efit, welfare, peace, and happiness, with a mind of kindness and compassion, [telling them], “This is for your welfare, this is for your happiness, this is for your welfare and happiness.” And suppose that those disciples do not behave respectfully and do not practice accordingly; they do not become established in knowledge, and their minds do not progress in the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma; they are unreceptive to the true Dharma, go against the teacher’s instruction, and are unable to attain samādhi. This

is how disciples behave toward the teacher with resentment and not with loving-kindness. Ānanda, how do disciples behave toward the teacher with loving-kindness and not with resentment? Suppose that the venerable teacher speaks to his disciples on the Dharma out of sympathy and concern, seeking their benefit, welfare, peace, and happiness, with a mind of kindness and compassion, [telling them], “This is for your welfare, this is for your happiness, this is for your welfare and happiness.” And suppose that those disciples behave respectfully and practice accordingly; they become established in knowledge and their minds progress in the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma; they are receptive to the true Dharma, do not go against the teacher’s instruc- tion, and are able to attain samādhi. This is how disciples behave toward the teacher with loving-kindness and not with resentment. Ānanda, for this reason you should all behave toward me with loving- kindness and not with resentment. Why is that? I do not speak [to you] in the way a potter makes pots. Ānanda, I speak [to you at times] sternly and with urgency, which [may] lead to suffering. Those [of you] who are genuine will certainly be able to stand [the test].^64 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Ānanda and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma191-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[JA537]], [[SN1.31]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN5.30]], [[AN6.42]], [[AN8.30]], [[AN8.86.]], [[AN8.9]], [[ITI109]], [[MN106]], [[MN121]], [[MN137]], [[SN1.3]], [[SN35.85]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA191]]
> ◄  [[ma190-bdk]] 📜  [[ma192-bdk]] ►
