---
sutta_code: "MA192"
sutta_title:
  - "家樓烏陀夷 "
  - "Kāḷudāyin"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA192]]
> ◄  [[ma191-bdk]] 📜  [[ma193-bdk]] ►

### 192. The Discourse on Kāḷudāyin

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha, who was traveling in the Aṅga country with a large sangha of monks, arrived at [the town of] Āpaṇa and stayed at Qiánruò Monastery. Then, toward dawn when the night was over, the World-honored One put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered Āpaṇa to beg for almsfood. After having partaken of the midday meal, he stowed away his robe and bowl, washed his hands and feet and, with a sitting mat over his shoulder, went to a forest wishing to spend the day’s abiding there. The venerable Udāyin too, toward dawn when the night was over, put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered Āpaṇa to beg for almsfood. After having partaken of the midday meal, he stowed away his robe and bowl, washed his hands and feet and, with a sitting mat over his shoulder, followed after the Buddha thinking, “Where the World-honored One now spends the day’s abid- ing, there I too will go for the day’s abiding.”^66 Then the World-honored One entered the forest and went to a tree. He spread his sitting mat under it and sat down cross-legged. The venerable Udāyin too entered that forest and went to a tree not far from the Buddha. He spread his sitting mat under it and sat down cross-legged. At that time, while sitting alone in meditation in that peaceful place and reflecting, the venerable Udāyin had this thought in his mind, “The World- honored One has brought us much benefit; the Well-gone One has brought us much peace. The World-honored One has caused us to abandon a multitude of painful states and increase pleasant states. The World-honored One has caused us to abandon countless evil and unwholesome states and increase countless wholesome and sublime states.” In the afternoon the venerable Udāyin rose from sitting in meditation, approached the Buddha, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet,

stepped back, and sat to one side. The World-honored One said, “Udāyin, do you lack nothing? Are you happy and at ease? Is your vigor as usual?”^67 The venerable Udāyin said, “Yes, World-honored One. I lack nothing, I am happy and at ease, and my vigor is as usual.” The World-honored One asked further, “Udāyin, how is it that you lack nothing, that you are happy and at ease, and that your vigor is as usual?” The venerable Udāyin replied: World-honored One, while sitting alone in meditation in a peaceful place and reflecting, I had this thought in my mind, “The World-honored One has brought us much benefit; the Well-gone One has brought us much peace. The World-honored One has caused us to abandon a multitude of painful states and to increase pleasant states. The World-honored One has caused us to abandon countless evil and unwholesome states and to increase countless wholesome and sublime states.” Long ago the World-honored One told us monks, “Abandon eating after noon!” World-honored One, having heard this we could not bear it, we could not tolerate it. We did not want it, we did not like it. If some faithful brahmin or householder came to the monastery [after noon] to donate a sumptuous offering and make merit, we would receive it with our own hands and eat it. But now the World-honored One was instructing us to abandon this; the Well-gone One was instructing us to put an end to it. We even said, “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Yet, out of our extreme respect for the World-honored One’s authority and sub- lime virtues, for this reason, we abandoned eating after midday. Again, long ago the World-honored One told us monks, “Abandon the evening meal!” World-honored One, having heard this, we could not bear it, we could not tolerate it. We did not want it, we did not like it. Of our two [daily] meals this was the superior one, the more excellent one, the better one, the finer one. But now the World-honored One was instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One was instructing us to put an end to it. We even said, “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” World-honored One, long ago a householder would often return home carrying many types of delicious food and beverages. He would instruct his family, “Take these and put them away somewhere. We will all eat them together in the evening, not in the morning.” World-honored One,

in every family the best, the most excellent meal was eaten only in the evening, [and] we [were to eat only] in the morning. Yet the World-honored One was now instructing us to abandon this; the Well-gone One was instructing us to put an end to it. We even said this: “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Yet, out of our extreme respect for the World-honored One’s authority and sublime virtues, for this reason, we abandoned the evening meal. World-honored One, I further thought, “If a monk enters a village to beg for almsfood at an improper time, he might come across thieves whether at work or not at work; or he might come across a tiger or come across a deer; or he might come across [both] a tiger and a deer; or he might come across a leopard or come across a bear; or he might come across [both] a leopard and a bear; or he might go to a place such that he would come across a fierce elephant, a fierce horse, a fierce bull, or a fierce dog; or he might encounter a nest of snakes; or he might have clods thrown at him; or he might be beaten with sticks; or he might fall into a ditch; or he might fall into a cesspool; or he might tread on a sleeping ox; or he might fall into a deep pit; or he might walk into a thornbush; or he might see an [apparently] empty house and enter it, and having entered it and met a woman, he might be shouted at and accused of having engaged in evil and impure conduct with her.” World-honored One, long ago, on a dark rainy night, when lightning was flashing repeatedly, a monk went to someone’s house begging for food at an improper time.^68 At that time the housewife was outside the house cleaning a cooking pot. By the light of a lightning flash she saw the monk in the distance and took him to be a ghost. On seeing this, she was so ter- rified that her body hairs all stood on end. She let out a great shout and then had a miscarriage. She said, “You are a ghost! You are a ghost!” Then that monk said to the housewife, “Sister, I am no ghost. I am a renunciant and right now I have come begging for food.” Then the house- wife angrily cursed the monk with what is most painful and most evil, say- ing, “May this renunciant’s life faculty soon be cut off! May this renunciant’s parents soon die! May this renunciant’s lineage become extinct! May this renunciant’s belly burst open and be destroyed! Bald-headed renunciant, trapped in your own swarthiness, without descendants and with your lineage

cut off, you would do better to take a sharp knife and cut open your own belly! You should not go begging for almsfood at an improper time of the night. May this renunciant who made me miscarry be punished!” World-honored One, when I recall that, there arises happiness [that such things can no longer happen]. World-honored One, because of this, happiness completely pervades and fills my body, together with right mindfulness and right comprehension, and there arise joy, tranquility, happiness, and samādhi. World-honored One, because this happiness completely pervades and fills my body, together with right mindfulness and right comprehension, therefore, World-honored One, I lack nothing, I am happy and at ease, and my vigor is as usual. The World-honored One expressed his approval: It is well, it is well, Udāyin, you are now not like those foolish people. When I tell those silly foolish people, “Abandon this [evening meal]!”, they say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? Yet the World-honored One is now instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They even say this: “This great renun ciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Yet, by not abandoning it, they become disapproving and intolerant of me and they also become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. Udāyin, those foolish people are bound extremely securely and firmly. They become increasingly agi tated, as they are unable to break away, unable to liberate themselves. Udāyin, they are just like a fly that is caught in a drop of saliva and will suffer or die in it.^69 Udāyin, if someone were to say that that fly is not caught securely and firmly, that it does not become increasingly agi tated, being able to break away, able to liberate itself—would that person be speaking correctly? The venerable Udāyin said: No, World-honored One. Why is that? The fly that is caught in a drop of saliva will suffer or die in it. Therefore, World-honored One, that fly is caught extremely securely and firmly. It becomes increasingly agitated, as it is unable to break away, unable to liberate itself.

[The Buddha said:]

[In the same way], Udāyin, when I tell those silly foolish people, “Abandon this [evening meal]!”, they say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? But now the World-honored One is instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They even say this: “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Yet by not abandoning it they become disapproving and intolerant of me, and they also become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. Udāyin, those foolish people are bound extremely securely and firmly. They become increasingly agitated, as they are unable to break away, unable to liberate themselves. Udāyin, if I tell clansmen, “Abandon this [evening meal],” they do not say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? But now the World-honored One is instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They also do not speak like this: “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Then they abandon it. They do not become disapproving and intolerant of me, and they also do not become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. Udāyin, those clansmen are not bound securely or firmly. They do not become increasingly agitated, as they are able to break away, able to liberate themselves. Udāyin, they are just like a royal elephant, up to sixty years old, a great proud elephant with body, legs, and tusks complete, full of physical strength, which is securely bound. If in a rage he forcefully twists his body, he will break away from those strong bonds and return to his former place. Udāyin, if someone were to say of this big royal elephant, up to sixty years old, this great proud elephant with body, legs, and tusks complete, full of physical strength, that he is bound extremely securely and firmly, and that he becomes increasingly agitated, as he is unable to break away, unable to liberate him- self—would that person be speaking correctly?

The venerable Udāyin said:

No, World-honored One. Why is that? That great royal elephant which is up to sixty years old, that great proud elephant with body, legs, and tusks

complete, full of physical strength, is securely bound. Yet, if in a rage he forcefully twists his body, he will break away from those strong bonds and return to his former place. World-honored One, for this reason that great royal elephant which is up to sixty years old, that great proud elephant with body, legs, and tusks complete, full of physical strength, is not bound securely and firmly; he does not become increasingly agitated, as he is able to break away, able to liberate himself. [The Buddha said:] In the same way, Udāyin, if I say to clansmen. “Abandon this [evening meal],” they do not say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? But now the World-honored One is instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They also do not speak like this: “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Then they abandon it. They do not become disapproving and intolerant of me, and they also do not become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. For this reason, Udāyin, those clansmen are not bound securely or firmly. They do not become increasingly agitated, as they are able to break away, able to liberate themselves. Udāyin, if I say to foolish people, “Abandon this [evening meal]!”, they say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? But now the World-honored One is instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They even say this: “This great renun ciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Yet, by not abandoning it they become disapproving and intolerant of me, and they also become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. Udāyin, those foolish people are bound extremely securely and firmly. They become increasingly agitated, as they are unable to break away, unable to liberate themselves. Udāyin, they are just like a poor man who has no wealth and also no influence. He has a wife who is blind, ugly, and unlovable. He has only a single hut, which is dilapidated and leaking, in which crows perch, so bad that it is not fit to live in. He has one bed which is also falling apart,

so bad it is not fit to lie down on. He has just one pitcher,^70 which is dam- aged and unusable. He sees a monk who, after having partaken of the midday meal, has washed his hands and feet, spread his sitting mat, and is sitting under a tree, pleasantly cool and in harmony, cultivating the higher mind. Seeing this, he thinks, “Renunciants are happy. Renunciants are as if [they have already attained] nirvana. I am bad and without virtue. Why is that? I have a wife who is blind, ugly, and unlovable, [yet] I am unable to leave her. I have only a single hut which is dilapidated and leaking, in which crows perch, so bad that it is not fit to live in, [yet] I am unable to leave it. I have one bed which is also falling apart, so bad it is not fit to lie down on, [yet] I am unable to leave it. I have just one pitcher, which is damaged and unusable, [yet] I am unable to leave it. I would love to be a monk, shaving off hair and beard, donning the yellow robes and, out of faith, giving up the household life and becoming a homeless one to train in the path.” Udāyin, if someone were to say, “This poor man, who has no wealth and also no influence, is not bound securely or firmly, he does not become increasingly agitated, as he is able to break away, able to liberate him- self”—would that person be speaking correctly?

The venerable Udāyin said:

No, World-honored One. Why is that? That poor man has a wife who is blind, ugly, and unlovable, [yet] he is unable to leave her. He has only a single hut which is dilapidated and leaking, in which crows perch, so bad that it is not fit to live in, [yet] he is unable to leave it. He has one bed which is also falling apart, so bad it is not fit to lie down on, [yet] he is unable to leave it. He has just one pitcher, which is damaged and unusable, [yet] he is unable to leave it. He would love to be a monk, shaving off hair and beard, donning the yellow robes and, out of faith, giving up the household life and becoming a homeless one to train in the path. World-honored One, for this reason that poor man who has no wealth and also no influence is bound extremely securely and firmly. He becomes increasingly agitated, as he is unable to break away, unable to liberate himself.

[The Buddha said:] In the same way, Udāyin, when I tell foolish people: “Abandon this [evening meal]!” they say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? But now the World-honored One is instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They even say this: “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Yet, by not abandoning it they become disapproving and intolerant of me, and they also become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. For this reason, Udāyin, those foolish people are bound extremely securely and firmly. They become increasingly agitated, as they are unable to break away, unable to liberate themselves. Udāyin, if I say to clansmen, “Abandon this [evening meal]!”, they do not say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? But now the World-honored One is instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They also do not speak like this: “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Then they abandon it. They do not become disapproving and intolerant of me, and they also do not become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. For this reason, Udāyin, those clansmen are not bound securely or firmly. They do not become increasingly agitated, as they are able to break away, able to liberate themselves. Udāyin, it is just as a householder or the son of a householder who is very prosperous, has much wealth, livestock, and property beyond imag ination, feudatories, manors, and abundant granaries, being endowed with many kinds of requisites of life, with countless male and female slaves, elephants, and horses. He sees a monk who, after having partaken of the midday meal, has washed his hands and feet, spread his sitting mat, and is sitting under a tree, pleasantly cool and in harmony, cultivating the higher mind. Seeing this, he thinks, “Renunciants are happy. Renunciants are as if [they have already attained] nirvana. Let me leave my great wealth: my gold and treasure, my wealth in grains, elephants, horses, and male and female

slaves. I would love to be a monk, shaving off hair and beard, donning the yellow robes and, out of faith, giving up the household life, and becom- ing a homeless one to train in the path.” Udāyin, if someone were to say, “This householder or son of a house- holder is bound securely and firmly. He becomes increasingly agitated, as he is unable to break away, unable to liberate himself”—would he be speaking correctly?

The venerable Udāyin said:

No, World-honored One. Why is that? That householder or son of a house- holder is capable of being separated from his great wealth, his gold and treasure, his wealth in grains, elephants, horses, and male and female slaves. He would love to be a monk, shaving off hair and beard, donning the yellow robes and, out of faith, giving up the household life and becom- ing a homeless one to train in the path. World-honored One, for this reason that householder or son of a house- holder is not bound securely and firmly. He does not become increasingly agitated, as he is able to break away, able to liberate himself.

[The Buddha said:]

In the same way, Udāyin, if I say to clansmen, “Abandon this [evening meal],” they do not say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? But now the World-honored One is instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They also do not speak like this: “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Then they abandon it. They do not become disapproving and intolerant of me, and they also do not become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. For this reason, Udāyin, those clansmen are not bound securely or firmly. They do not become increasingly agitated, as they are able to break away, able to liberate themselves. Udāyin, a monk practices giving up. After he has practiced giving up, thoughts related to sensual pleasure arise in him and he is bound by craving and delight. He delights in them. He does not abandon them, does not settle them, does not vomit them out. Udāyin, I say that he is in bondage;

I do not say that he is liberated. Why is that? All fetters are unwholesome, Udāyin; and because fetters are unwholesome, I say he is in bondage; I do not say he is liberated.^71 Udāyin, a monk practices giving up. After he has practiced giving up, thoughts related to sensual pleasure arise in him and he is bound by craving and delight. He does not delight in them. He abandons them, settles them, vomits them out. Udāyin, I say that he too is in bondage; I do not say that he is liberated. Why is that? All fetters are unwholesome, Udāyin; and because fetters are unwholesome, I say he is in bondage; I do not say he is liberated. Udāyin, a monk practices giving up. After he has practiced giving up, at times his mind is forgetful. He has thoughts related to sensual pleasure and he is bound by craving and delight. He is slow in observing them, but quick in eradicating them. Udāyin, it is like an iron ball or an iron plowshare that has been heated in a fire for a whole day. If a person releases two or three drops of water on to it, the drops are slow and discontinuous [in forming], but the water then quickly disappears. Udāyin, in the same way, a monk practices giving up. After he has practiced abandoning, at times his mind is forgetful. He has thoughts related to sensual pleasure and he is bound by craving and delight. He is slow in observing them but quick in eradicating them. Udāyin, I say that he too is in bondage; I do not say that he is liberated. Why is that? All fetters are unwholesome, Udāyin, and because fetters are unwholesome, I say he is in bondage; I do not say he is liberated. Udāyin, right at the root of dukkha, [a monk] dwells in the practice for that which is without birth and death, and with the unsurpassable eradi cation of craving his mind is well liberated. Udāyin, I say this is liberation; I do not say it is bondage. Why is that? All fetters have been eradicated. Udāyin, because all fetters are eradicated, I say this is liberation; I do not say it is bondage. Udāyin, there is a pleasure that is an ignoble pleasure, a worldly pleasure that is essentially a disease, essentially a carbuncle, essentially a dart and a thorn, that is worldly, that [pertains to] birth and death, which should not be cultivated, should not be practiced, should not be made much of, which I say should definitely not be cultivated.

Udāyin, there is a pleasure that is a noble pleasure, a pleasure without sensuality, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of calm, the pleasure [leading to] full awakening, which is not worldly and does not [pertain] to birth and death, which should be cultivated, should be practiced, should be made much of, which I say should definitely be cultivated. Udāyin, what is the pleasure that is an ignoble pleasure, a worldly pleasure that is essentially a disease, essentially a carbuncle, essentially a dart and a thorn, that is worldly, that [pertains] to birth and death, which should not be cultivated, should not be practiced, should not be made much of, which I say should definitely not be cultivated? If pleasure and arise in dependence on the five senses,^72 then this is an ignoble pleasure, a worldly pleasure that is essentially a disease, essentially a carbuncle, essentially a dart and a thorn, that it is worldly, that [pertains to] birth and death, which should not be cultivated, should not be practiced, should not be made much of, which I say should definitely not be cultivated. Udāyin, what is the pleasure that is a noble pleasure, a pleasure without sensuality, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of calm, the pleasure [leading to] full awakening, which is not worldly and does not [pertain] to birth and death, which should be cultivated, should be practiced, should be made much of, which I say should definitely be cultivated? Udāyin, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwhole- some states... up to... a monk dwells having attained the fourth absorp- tion. This is the pleasure that is a noble pleasure, a pleasure without sen- suality, the pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of calm, the pleasure [leading to] full awakening, which is not worldly and which does not [pertain] to birth and death, which should be cultivated, should be practiced, should be made much of, which I say should definitely be cultivated. Udāyin, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwhole- some states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion, a monk dwells having attained the first absorption. Noble ones call this perturbable. Herein what is it that noble ones call perturbable? It is the [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation that noble ones call perturbable. Herein what [else] do noble ones call perturbable?

Udāyin, with the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] con templation, with inner stillness and mental unification, without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of samādhi, a monk dwells having attained the second absorption. Noble ones call this perturbable. Herein what is it that nobles ones call perturbable? It is the gaining of joy that noble ones call perturbable. Herein what [else] do nobles ones call perturbable? Udāyin, secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling in equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right compre hension, experiencing happiness with the body, a monk dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equa nimity and mindfulness, a happy abode.^73 Noble ones call this perturbable. Herein what is it that noble ones call perturbable? It is the perturbation of mental happiness that the noble ones call perturbable. Herein what do noble ones call imperturbable? Udāyin, with the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of rapture and displeasure, with neither-pain nor-pleasure, with purity of equanimity and mindfulness, a monk dwells having attained the fourth absorption. Noble ones call this imperturbable. Udāyin, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwhole some states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion, a monk dwells having attained the first absorption. Udāyin, I say he has not attained separation,^74 has not attained abandoning, has not attained going beyond. What is “going beyond” in respect to this? Udāyin, with the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] con templation, with inner stillness and mental unification, without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of samādhi, a monk dwells having attained the second absorption. This is what is meant by “going beyond” in respect to this. Udāyin I say he still has not attained separation, has not attained abandoning, has not attained going beyond. What is “going beyond” in respect to this? Udāyin, secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling in equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right compre hension, experiencing happiness with the body, a monk dwells having

attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equa- nimity and mindfulness, a happy abode. This is what is meant by “going beyond” in respect to this. Udāyin, I say he still has not attained separation, has not attained abandoning, has not attained going beyond. What is “going beyond” in respect to this? Udāyin, with the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of joy and displeasure, with neither pain nor pleasure, with purity of equanimity and mindfulness, a monk dwells having attained the fourth absorption. This is what is meant by “going beyond” in respect to this. Udāyin, I say he still has not attained separation, has not attained abandoning, has not attained going beyond. What is “going beyond” in respect to this? Udāyin, by completely transcending perceptions of form, with the ces- sation of perceptions of sensory impact, unaware of perceptions of diversity, [being instead aware of] infinite space, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of infinite space. This is what is meant by “going beyond” in respect to this. Udāyin, I say he still has not attained separation, has not attained abandoning, has not attained going beyond. What is “going beyond” in respect to this? Udāyin, by completely transcending the sphere of infinite space, [aware] of infinite consciousness, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of infinite consciousness. This is what is meant by “going beyond’ in respect to this. Udāyin, I say he still has not attained separation, has not attained abandoning, has not attained going beyond. What is “going beyond” in respect to this? Udāyin, by completely transcending the sphere of infinite consciousness, [aware] that “there is nothing,” a monk dwells having attained the sphere of nothingness. This is what is meant by “going beyond” in respect to this. Udāyin, I say he still has not attained separation, has not attained abandoning, has not attained going beyond. What is “going beyond” in respect to this? Udāyin, by completely transcending the sphere of nothingness, [aware] of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, a monk dwells having attained the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception. This is what is meant by “going beyond” in respect to this. Udāyin, I say that, [even] on reaching

the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception he still has not attained separation, has not attained abandoning, has not attained going beyond.^75 Udāyin, is there a single fetter, which has remained for much or little time for those of whom I have said that they have not achieved separation, have not achieved abandoning, have not achieved going beyond; [a fetter] of which I say that it should not be abandoned? The venerable Udāyin said: “There is not, World-honored One.” The World-honored One praised him, saying:^76 It is well, it is well, Udāyin! You are not like those foolish people. When I say to those silly foolish people, “Abandon this [evening meal],” they say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? But now the World-honored One is instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They even say this: “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Yet by not abandoning it they become disapproving and intolerant of me and they also become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. Udāyin, those foolish people are bound extremely securely and firmly. They become increasingly agi tated, as they are unable to break away, unable to liberate themselves. Udāyin, if I say to clansmen: “Abandon this [evening meal],” they do not say, “This is a small matter. Why would it be worth abandoning? But now the World-honored One is instructing us to abandon it; the Well-gone One is making us put an end to it.” They also do not speak like this: “This great renunciant cannot do away with [our] food!” Then they abandon it. They do not become disapproving and intolerant of me, and they also do not become disapproving and intolerant of other monks who are well-disciplined and uphold the rules. For this reason, Udāyin, those clansmen are not bound securely or firmly. They do not become increasingly agitated, as they are able to break away, able to liberate themselves. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Udāyin was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma192-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA49.7]], [[MA194]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MN132]], [[MN133]], [[MN134]], [[JA538]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA192]]
> ◄  [[ma191-bdk]] 📜  [[ma193-bdk]] ►
