---
sutta_code: "MA19"
sutta_title:
  - "尼乾 "
  - "to the Nigaṇṭhas"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA19]]
> ◄  [[ma18-bdk]] 📜  [[ma20-bdk]] ►

### 19. The Discourse to Nigaṇṭhas

Thus have I heard: At one time, the Buddha was staying among the Sakyans, in Devadaha.

There the World-honored One told the monks:

The Nigaṇṭhas hold this view and declare: Whatever one experiences is caused by what was done in the past. If past karma is eradicated through asceticism, and no new [karma] is created, then all karma comes to cease; all karma having ceased, the cessation of suffering is attained; the cessation of suffering being attained, the end of suffering is attained. I therefore approached them, and on arriving, I asked: Nigaṇṭhas, do you hold this view and declare: “Whatever one experiences is caused by what was done in the past. If past karma is eradicated through asceticism, and no new [karma] is created, then all karma comes to cease; all karma having ceased, the ces sation of suffering is attained; the cessation of suffering being attained, the end of suffering is attained”? They replied: “That is so, Gotama.” I also asked those Nigaṇṭhas: Do you personally have clear knowledge that “I existed in the past,” or “I did not exist in the past”; “I did evil in the past,” or “I did not do evil in the past”; “This much of the suffering that I cre ated has already been exhausted,” or “This much of the suffering that I created has not yet been exhausted,” or “When this has been exhausted, when its exhaustion is attained, then, by practicing, I will realize in this lifetime the eradication of all unwholesome states and the attainment of manifold wholesome states”? They replied: “No, Gotama.” I also said to those Nigaṇṭhas: [You have affirmed that] you do not personally have clear knowl edge that “I existed in the past,” or “I did not exist in the past”; “I did evil in the past,” or “I did not do evil in the past”; “This much of the suffering that I created has already been exhausted,” or “This much of the suffering that I created has not been exhausted,” or “When this has been exhausted, when its exhaustion is attained, then, by practicing, I will realize in this lifetime the eradication

of all unwholesome states and the attainment of manifold whole some states.” How, then, can you claim: “Whatever one experiences is caused by what was done in the past. If past karma is eradicated through asceticism, and no new [karma] is created, then all karma comes to cease; all karma having ceased, the cessation of suffering is attained; the cessation of suffering being attained, the end of suffering is attained”? Nigaṇṭhas, if you personally had clear knowledge that: “I existed in the past,” or “I did not exist in the past”; “I did evil in the past,” or “I did not do evil in the past”; “This much of the suf fering that I created has already been exhausted,” or “This much of the suffering that I created has not been exhausted”; or “When this has been exhausted, when its exhaustion is attained, then, by practicing, I will realize in this lifetime the eradication of all unwholesome states and the attainment of manifold wholesome states,” then, Nigaṇṭhas, you could claim: “Whatever one expe riences is caused by what was done in the past. If past karma is eradicated through asceticism, and no new [karma] is created, all karma comes to cease; all karma having ceased, the cessation of suffering is attained; the cessation of suffering being attained, the end of suffering is attained.” Nigaṇṭhas, suppose that a man’s body has been wounded by a poisoned arrow and, because of being wounded by this poisoned arrow, extreme pain arises. Then, out of sympathy and concern about the wound, his kinsmen and relatives call a surgeon to pull out the arrow, for his benefit and well-being. The surgeon comes, and with a sharp knife cuts the wound open; and while the wound is being cut open, extreme pain arises again. Having cut the wound open, the surgeon probes for the metal arrowhead; and while he is probing for the arrowhead, extreme pain arises again. Having probed and found the arrowhead, he pulls it out; and while he is pulling it out, extreme pain arises again. Having pulled out the arrowhead, he dresses and bandages the wound; and while he is bandaging it, extreme pain arises again. After the arrowhead has been pulled out,

that man regains his vigor and feels well. Withoutany damage to his faculties, he recovers and is just as he was before. Nigaṇṭhas, that man, personally having clear knowledge, thinks: “Formerly I was wounded by a poisoned arrow, and because of that extreme pain arose. Then, out of sympathy and concern about the wound, my kinsmen and relatives called a surgeon to pull out the arrow, for the sake of my benefit and well-being. The surgeon came, and with a sharp knife cut the wound open; and while the wound was being cut open, extreme pain arose again. Having cut the wound open, the surgeon probed for the metal arrowhead; and while he was probing for the arrowhead, extreme pain arose again. Having probed and found the arrowhead, he pulled it out; and while he was pulling it out, extreme pain arose again. Having pulled out the arrowhead, he dressed and bandaged the wound; and while he was bandaging it, extreme pain arose again. After the arrowhead had been pulled out, I regained my vigor and felt well. Without any damage to my faculties, I recovered and was just as I had been before.” In the same way, Nigaṇṭhas, if you personally had clear knowl- edge that “I existed in the past,” or “I did not exist in the past”; “I did evil in the past,” or “I did not do evil in the past”; “This much of the suffering that I created has already been exhausted,” or “This much of the suffering that I created has not been exhausted”; or “When this has been exhausted, when its exhaustion is attained, then, by practicing, I will realize in this lifetime the eradication of all unwholesome states and the attainment of manifold whole- some states,” then, Nigaṇṭhas, you could claim: “Whatever one experiences is caused by what was done in the past. If past karma is eradicated through asceticism, and no new [karma] is created, all karma comes to cease; all karma having ceased, the cessation of suffering is attained; the cessation of suffering being attained, the end of suffering is attained.” I asked them in this way, but I did not see any of the Nigaṇṭhas able to answer me, saying: “Gotama, it is so,” or “It is not so.”

Again, I asked the Nigaṇṭhas: “If the Nigaṇṭhas [engage in] strong striving and strong asceticism, will at that time strong pain arise in the Nigaṇṭhas?” They replied: “Yes, Gotama.” [The Buddha said:] “If the Nigaṇṭhas [engage in] middling striving and middling asceticism, will at that time middling pain arise in the Nigaṇṭhas?” They replied: “Yes, Gotama.” [The Buddha said:] “If the Nigaṇṭhas [engage in] weak striving and weak asceticism, will at that time weak pain arise in the Nigaṇṭhas?” They replied: “Yes, Gotama.” [The Buddha said:] That is to say, [when] the Nigaṇṭhas [engage in] strong striving and strong asceticism, at that time strong pain arises in the Nigaṇṭhas; [when] they [engage in] middling striving and middling asceticism, at that time middling pain arises in the Nigaṇṭhas; [when] they [engage in] weak striving and weak asceticism, at that time weak pain arises in the Nigaṇṭhas. When the Nigaṇṭhas [engage in] strong striving and strong asceticism, at that time strong pain is calmed by the Nigaṇṭhas; [when] they [engage in] middling striving and middling asceticism, at that time middling pain is calmed by the Nigaṇṭhas; [when] they [engage in] weak striving and weak asceticism, at that time weak pain is calmed by the Nigaṇṭhas. Whether they act like this or do not act like this to calm that extreme pain, that great and heavy pain, it should be known that the Nigaṇṭhas are [simply] producing [their own] pain in the pres ent life. But the Nigaṇṭhas are enveloped by ignorance, possessed by ignorance, saying: “Whatever one experiences is caused by what was done in the past. If past karma is eradicated through asceticism, and no new [karma] is created, all karma comes to cease; all karma having ceased, the cessation of suffering is attained; the cessation of suffering being attained, the end of suffering is attained.”

I asked them in this way, but I did not find any Nigaṇṭha able to answer me, saying: “Gotama, it is so,” or “It is not so.” I also asked the Nigaṇṭhas: “Nigaṇṭhas, if there is an action whose result is to be experienced as happiness, can that action, through striving and through asceticism, be turned into having suffering as its result?” They replied: “No, Gotama.” [I asked them further] “Nigaṇṭhas, if there is an action whose result is to be experienced as suffering, can that action, through striving and through asceticism, be turned into having happiness as its result?” They replied: “No, Gotama.” “Nigaṇṭhas, if there is an action whose result is to be experienced in this lifetime, can that action, through striving and through asceticism, be turned into having its result in a later life?” They replied: “No, Gotama.” “Nigaṇṭhas, if there is an action whose result is to be experienced in a later life, can that action, through striving and through asceticism, be turned into having its result in this lifetime?” They replied: “No, Gotama.” “Nigaṇṭhas, if there is an action whose result has not yet matured, can that action, through striving and through asceticism, be turned into having its result matured?” They replied: “No, Gotama.” “Nigaṇṭhas, if there is an action whose result has matured, can that action, through striving and through asceticism, be made otherwise?” They replied: “No, Gotama.” [The Buddha said:] That is to say, Nigaṇṭhas, an action whose result is to be experi- enced as happiness, that action cannot, through striving and through asceticism, be turned into having suffering as its result. Nigaṇṭhas, an action whose result is to be experienced as suf- fering, that action cannot, through striving and through asceticism, be turned into having happiness as its result. Nigaṇṭhas, an action whose result is to be experienced in this lifetime, that action cannot, through striving and through asceticism, be turned into having its result in a later life.

Nigaṇṭhas, an action whose result is to be experienced in a later life, that action cannot, through striving and through asceti cism, be turned into having its result in this lifetime. Nigaṇṭhas, an action whose result has not yet matured, that action cannot, through striving and through asceticism, be turned into having its result matured. Nigaṇṭhas, an action whose result has matured, that action can not, through striving and through asceticism, be made otherwise. Therefore, Nigaṇṭhas, your effort is in vain, your striving is empty and futile. Then those Nigaṇṭhas told me: “Gotama, we have a venerable teacher, named Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, who proclaims thus:” Nigaṇṭhas, if you created evil karma in the past, then that karma can be completely extinguished by means of this asceticism. [And] if you now restrain your body, speech, and mind, then through this [restraint] you will not create any further evil karma. Again, I asked those Nigaṇṭhas: “Do you believe in [your] venerable teacher, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, without having any doubts?” They replied: “Gotama, we believe in [our] venerable teacher, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, without having any doubts.” Again, I said to those Nigaṇṭhas: There are five things, which may have a twofold result in the pres ent life. They are: belief, liking, oral tradition, memory, and well considered view. Nigaṇṭhas, a person who himself says what is untrue, could [he regard that untrue statement] as believable, as likable, as traditional, as memorable, as a well-considered view? They replied: “Yes, Gotama.” Then I said further to those Nigaṇṭhas: [But given that] it is an untrue statement, how could it be believable, how could it be likable, how could it be traditional, how could it be memorable, how could it be well contemplated? [Yet] the person who himself says what is untrue has belief [in it], has liking [for

it], has heard [it as tradition], has memory [of it], has considered [it] well.

[Monks,] if the Nigaṇṭhas speak thus, then they incur a fivefold censure according to the Dharma and can be reproached.^87 What are the five? If all the pleasure and pain that these beings now experience is caused by actions done [in the past, then the Nigaṇṭhas [must] have done evil in the past. Why? Because that would be the reason why the Nigaṇṭhas now experience extreme pain. This is the first [ground] on which the Nigaṇṭhas can be reproached. Again, if all the pleasure and pain that beings experience is caused by the company they kept, then the Nigaṇṭhas [must] have kept evil company in the past. Why? Because that would be why the Nigaṇṭhas now experience extreme pain. This is the second [ground] on which the Nigaṇṭhas can be reproached. Again, if all the pleasure and pain that beings experience is caused by destiny, then the Nigaṇṭhas [must] have had an evil destiny in the past. Why? Because that would be why the Nigaṇṭhas now experience extreme pain. This is the third [ground] on which the Nigaṇṭhas can be reproached. Again, if all the pleasure and pain that beings experience is caused by views, then the Nigaṇṭhas [must] have held evil views in the past. Why? Because that would be why the Nigaṇṭhas now experience extreme pain. This is the fourth [ground] on which the Nigaṇṭhas can be reproached. Again, if all the pleasure and pain that beings experience is caused and created by a supreme god, then in the past the Nigaṇṭhas [must] have been created by an evil supreme god. Why? Because that would be why the Nigaṇṭhas now experience extreme pain. This is the fifth [ground] on which the Nigaṇṭhas can be reproached. If in the past the Nigaṇṭhas did evil,... kept evil company,... had an evil destiny,... held evil views, [if there was] an evil supreme god and they were created by this evil supreme god; and if because of this the Nigaṇṭhas now experience extreme pain—then for these reasons, on these grounds, the Nigaṇṭhas can be reproached.

The Dharma, which I came to know by myself and realized by myself, and which I have proclaimed to you, cannot be refuted, cannot be defiled, cannot be prevailed over by any renunciant, brahmin, god, Māra, Brahmā or anyone else in the world. Why is it that the Dharma, which I came to know by myself and realized by myself, and which I have proclaimed to you, cannot be refuted, cannot be defiled, cannot be prevailed over by any renunciant, brahmin, god, Māra, Brahmā or anyone else in the world? If a monk abandons unwholesome bodily actions and practices wholesome bodily actions, [if he] abandons unwholesome verbal and mental actions and practices wholesome verbal and mental actions, then in regard to future suffering [due to present unwholesome actions] he personally knows: “there will be no [such] future suffering for me.” In accordance with the Dharma he attains happiness and will not dis card it. Aspiring to eliminate a [particular] cause of suffering, he may prac tice with [that] aspiration; or, aspiring to eliminate a [particular] cause of suffering, he may practice equanimity [in regard to that] aspiration. If, aspiring to eliminate a [particular] cause of suffering, he practices with [that] aspiration; and if he then develops his practice with [that] aspiration and eliminates that [particular cause of suffering], then the [corresponding] suffering comes to be extinguished. If, aspiring to eliminate a [particular] cause of suffering, he practices equanimity [in regard to that] aspiration; and if he then develops his practice with equanimity and eliminates that [particular cause of suf fering], then the [corresponding] suffering comes to be extinguished. Then, the monk has this thought: According to one’s behavior, according to one’s deeds, unwhole some states arise and wholesome states cease. If I eliminate my suffering for myself,^88 then unwholesome states will cease and wholesome states will arise. Now, I would better eliminate my suffering for myself. Then he eliminates the suffering and, once the suffering has been elim inated, unwholesome states cease and wholesome states arise, and he

no longer needs to eliminate suffering. Why? Because, monks, his orig inal purpose has been achieved, it is not the case that he might need to eliminate suffering again. Monks, it is just as a fletcher may use a template to straighten an arrow, but once the arrow has been straightened, he has no further use for the template. Why? Because that person’s original purpose has been achieved, it is not the case that he might need to use the template again. In the same way, a monk has this thought: According to one’s behavior, according to one’s deeds unwhole some states arise and wholesome states cease. If I eliminate my suffering for myself, then unwholesome states will cease and wholesome states will arise. Now, I would better eliminate my suffering for myself. Then he eliminates the suffering and, once the suffering has been elim inated, unwholesome states cease and wholesome states arise, and he no longer needs to eliminate the suffering. Why? Because his original purpose has been achieved, it is not the case that he might need to elim inate this suffering again. Monks, suppose that a [certain] man loves a woman, is attached to her, and has high regard for her; but the woman instead gets talking with someone else, exchanges greetings with him, and they go off and spend the night together. Would, because of this, physical and mental suffering, vexation, and extreme grief and sorrow arise in that man?

The monks replied:

Yes indeed, World-honored One. And why? That man loves the woman, is attached to her and has high regard for her; but then that woman instead gets talking with someone else, exchanges greetings with him, and they go off to spend the night together. How could, because of this, physical and mental suffering, vexation, and extreme grief and sorrow not arise in that man?^89

[The Buddha:]

Monks, suppose that man thinks like this:

I love that woman, and have high regard for her; but that woman instead got talking with another man, exchanged greetings with him, and they went off to spend the night together. Because of my suffering and sadness, shouldn’t I now rather cut off my love and attachment for that woman? Then that man, because of his own suffering and sadness, cuts off his love and attachment for that woman. If that woman, as before, gets talk ing with someone else, exchanges greetings with him, and they go off to spend the night together, would again, because of that, physical and mental suffering, vexation, and extreme grief and sorrow arise in him? The monks replied: No, World-honored One. And why not? Because that man no longer has a feeling of love and attachment for that woman. If that woman, as before, gets talking with someone else, exchanges greetings with him, and they go off to spend the night together, it is not the case that, because of that, physical and mental suffering, vexation, and extreme grief and sorrow will arise in him. [The Buddha:] In the same way, a monk has this thought: According to one’s actions, according to one’s deeds, unwholesome states arise and wholesome states cease. If I eliminate the suffering, then the unwholesome states will cease and wholesome states will arise. Now, I would better eliminate my suffering. Then he eliminates the suffering and, once the suffering has been elim inated, unwholesome states cease and wholesome states arise, and he no longer needs to eliminate the suffering. Why? Because his original purpose has been achieved, he need not again eliminate the suffering. Then he has this further thought: Whatever the cause of [this] suffering that was to be eliminated, I have eliminated it; yet with regard to desire [itself] it is as before— it is not eliminated. Now, I would better seek to eliminate desire!

So he seeks to eliminate desire [itself]. In order to eliminate that desire, he dwells alone, in seclusion, resorting to a secluded place—to the base of a tree, to an empty and quiet place, a mountain top, a cave, [a place] in the open air, a heap of straw; or he goes into a forest, or to a cemetery. Having resorted to a secluded place—to the base of a tree, to an empty and quiet place—he spreads his sitting mat, sits down cross- legged, with upright body and upright intention, and sets up mindfulness before him. He abandons covetousness, his mind is free from envy. Seeing another’s wealth and lifestyle, he does not give rise to thoughts of cov- etousness: “If only I could get that!” He purifies his mind of covetousness; and similarly of hatred, sloth and torpor, restlessness and worry. He abandons doubt and overcomes confusion; without hesitation in regard to wholesome states, he purifies his mind of doubt and confusion. Having abandoned these five hindrances, which are imperfections of the mind that weaken wisdom, having abandoned desire, abandoned evil and unwholesome states,... (and so on up to) he dwells having attained the fourth absorption. When he has attained samādhi in this way, his mind being purified, without blemish, free of vexations, malleable, well established, having attained imperturbability, he directs his mind to the realization of the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints. He knows as it really is: “this is suffering”; he knows: “this is the origin of suffering”; he knows: “this is the cessation of suffering”; he knows as it really is: “this is the path to the cessation of suffering.” Again, he knows as it really is: “these are the taints”; he knows: “this is the origin of the taints”; he knows: “this is the cessation of the taints”; he knows as it really is: “this is the path to the cessation of the taints.” Knowing thus, seeing thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of igno- rance. Being liberated, he knows he is liberated. He understands as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what was to be done has been done; there will not be another existence.”

The Tathāgata who has, in this way, rightly liberated the mind, gains five kinds of praise, [praise that is] according to the Dharma, undisputed, desirable, and highly regarded. What are the five? If all the pleasure and pain that beings now experience is caused by deeds in the past, then the Tathāgata [must] have done sublime actions in the past; and because of that, the Tathāgata now experiences a noble happiness that is free of taints. Quiescent and calm, he has attained happiness and awakening. This is the first praise gained by the Tathāgata. Again, if all the pleasure and pain that beings experience is caused by the company they have kept, then the Tathāgata [must have] kept good company in the past; and because of that, the Tathāgata now expe riences a noble happiness free of taints. Quiescent and calm, he has attained happiness and awakening. This is the second praise gained by the Tathāgata. Again, if all the pleasure and pain that beings experience is caused by destiny, then the Tathāgata [must have] had a good destiny in the past; and because of that, the Tathāgata now experiences a noble hap piness free of taints. Quiescent and calm, he has attained happiness and awakening. This is the third praise gained by the Tathāgata. Again, if all the pleasure and pain that beings experience is caused by holding views, then the Tathāgata [must have] held good views in the past; and because of that, the Tathāgata now experiences a noble happiness free of taints. Quiescent and calm, he has attained happiness and awakening. This is the fourth praise gained by the Tathāgata. Again, if all the pleasure and pain that beings experience is caused and created by a supreme god, then the Tathāgata [must have been cre ated by] a good supreme god in the past; and because of that, the Tathā gata now experiences a noble happiness free of taints. Quiescent and calm, he has attained happiness and awakening. This is the fifth praise gained by the Tathāgata. Thus, because of the Tathāgata’s former good actions, good com pany, good destiny, good view, and the existence of a good supreme god, the good supreme god by which the Tathāgata was created— because of these the Tathāgata now experiences a noble happiness free

from taints, is quiescent and calm, having attained happiness and awak- ening. For these reasons, the Tathāgata now gains five kinds of praise. There are five causes and conditions owing to which sorrow and suffering arise in the mind. What are the five? [The first is] entanglement in sexual desire; because of entangle- ment in sexual desire, sorrow and suffering arise in the mind. Similarly entanglement in hatred,... sloth and torpor,... restlessness and worry, entanglement in doubt; because of entanglement in doubt, sorrow and suffering arise in the mind. These are the five causes and conditions owing to which sorrow and suffering arise in the mind. There are five causes and conditions owing to which sorrow and suffering disappear from the mind. What are the five? If one is entangled in sexual desire, and because of entanglement in sexual desire, sorrow and suffering have arisen in the mind, then on abandoning entanglement in sexual desire, the sorrow and suffering will cease. Owing to entan- glement in sexual desire, sorrow and suffering have arisen in the mind; but on attaining the goal in this lifetime, there is freedom from vexation and affliction, constantly present and unchanging, as is known to the noble ones and seen by the noble ones. In the same way, if one is entangled in hatred... sloth and torpor

... restlessness and worry... if one is entangled in doubt, and because of entanglement in doubt, sorrow and suffering have arisen in the mind, then on abandoning entanglement in doubt, the sorrow and suffering will cease. Owing to entanglement in doubt, sorrow and suffering have arisen in the mind; but on attaining the goal in this lifetime, there is freedom from vexation and affliction, constantly present and unchang- ing, as is known to the noble ones and seen by the noble ones. These are the five causes and conditions owing to which sorrow and suffering disappear from the mind. Again, there is another attaining of the goal in this lifetime, which is free from vexation and affliction, constantly present and unchanging, as is known to the noble ones and seen by the noble ones. What is that other attaining of the goal in this lifetime, which is free from vexation and affliction, constantly present and unchanging, as is known to the noble ones and seen by the noble ones? It is the noble eightfold path:

right view... (and so on up to) right samādhi—these eight. This is another attaining of the goal in this lifetime, which is free from vex ation and affliction, constantly present and unchanging, as is known to the noble ones and seen by the noble ones. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma19-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN2.27]], [[JA509]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN3.61]], [[AN3.99]], [[MA13]], [[SN35.145]], [[SN36.21]], [[SN42.11]], [[SN42.8]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA19]]
> ◄  [[ma18-bdk]] 📜  [[ma20-bdk]] ►
