---
sutta_code: "MA194"
sutta_title:
  - "跋陀和利 "
  - "With Bhaddāli"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA194]]
> ◄  [[ma193-bdk]] 📜  [[ma195-bdk]] ►

### 194. The Discourse to Bhaddāli

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park, spending the rains retreat together with a large sangha of monks. At that time the World-honored One said to the monks: I eat [just] one meal [a day]. Eating [just] one meal [a day], I am without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. My body is light, strong, and healthy. I am happy and at ease. You too should train in eating [just] one meal [a day]. Having [trained in] eating [just] one meal [a day], you will be without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Your bodies will be light, strong, and healthy. You will be happy and at ease. At that time the venerable Bhaddāli was among the assembly. Then the venerable Bhaddāli rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hand with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:

World-honored One, I cannot endure eating [just] one meal [a day]. Why is that? If I eat [just] one meal [a day], that is equivalent to not having

finished. I feel upset and regretful. World-honored One, for this reason I cannot endure eating [just] one meal [a day]. The World-honored One said: Bhaddāli, if I accept an invitation [to a meal], you can accompany me. I permit you to take [a part of] it away and then eat it [later in the day, reck oning this as just] one meal. Bhaddāli, in this way you will be happy and be able to sustain yourself. The venerable Bhaddāli said further: World-honored One, in this way I still cannot endure eating [just] one meal [a day]. Why is that? If I eat [just] one meal [a day], that is equivalent to not having finished. I feel upset and regretful. World-honored One, for this reason I cannot endure eating [just] one meal [a day]. Three times the World-honored One said to the monks:^89 I eat [just] one meal [a day]. Eating [just] one meal [a day], I am without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. My body is light, strong, and healthy. I am happy and at ease. You too should train in eating [just] one meal [a day]. Having [trained in] eating [just] one meal [a day], you will be without preoccupation, without pursuit, and without sickness and pain. Your bodies will be light, strong, and healthy. You will be happy and at ease. Up to three times the venerable Bhaddāli rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said: World-honored One, I cannot endure eating [just] one meal [a day]. Why is that? If I eat [just] one meal [a day], that is equivalent to not having finished. I feel upset and regretful. World-honored One, for this reason I cannot endure eating [just] one meal [a day]. Up to three times the World-honored One said: Bhaddāli, if I accept an invitation [to a meal], you can accompany me. I permit you to take [part of] it away and then eat it [later in the day, reckoning

this as just] one meal. Bhaddāli, in this way you will be happy and be able to sustain yourself. Up to three times the venerable Bhaddāli said: World-honored One, in this way I still cannot endure eating [just] one meal [a day]. Why is that? If I eat [just] one meal [a day], that is equivalent to not having finished. I feel upset and regretful. World-honored One, for this reason I cannot endure eating [just] one meal [a day]. At that time the World-honored One promulgated the rule for the sangha of monks that they should eat [just] one meal [a day]. All of the monks in the sangha respectfully trained in that rule, and in the entire sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. Only the venerable Bhaddāli said that he could not endure it. He rose from his seat and left. Why was that? It was because he would not fully train in the rules, and in the entire sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One.^90 Thereafter the venerable Bhaddāli kept to himself, and for the whole rains retreat he did not present himself to the World-honored One. Why was that? It was because he would not fully train in the rules, and in the entire sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. At that time the monks were making a robe for the Buddha, [thinking,] “Having completed the rains retreat at Sāvatthī, the three months being over, his robes being mended, the World-honored One will take his robes and bowl and wander among the people.” The venerable Bhaddāli heard that the monks were making a robe for the Buddha, [thinking,] “Having completed the rains retreat at Sāvatthī, the three months being over, his robes being mended, the World-honored One will take his robes and bowl and wander among the people.” Hearing this, the venerable Bhaddāli approached the monks. On seeing from afar the venerable Bhaddāli coming, the monks said [to him]:

Venerable Bhaddāli, you should know that we are making this robe for the Buddha, [thinking,] “Having completed the rains retreat at Sāvatthī, the three months being over, his robes being mended, the World-honored One will take his robes and bowl and wander among the people.” Bhaddāli, you should discipline yourself well in this matter, lest it later bring you much trouble.

Having heard these words, the venerable Bhaddāli approached the Buddha, paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, and said:

World-honored One, I have truly committed a transgression. I have truly committed a transgression. I was like a fool, like an ignorant person, like one who does not understand, like one who is unskilled. Why is that? The World-honored One promulgated the rule on eating [just] one meal [a day] for the sangha of monks. All of the monks in the sangha respectfully trained in that rule, and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. I alone said that I could not tolerate it, rose from my seat, and left. Why is that? Because I did not fully train in the rules and in the Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. The World-honored One said: Bhaddāli, at that time you did not recognize this: “Many monks and nuns are spending the rains retreat at Sāvatthī. They know me and see me [and they think], ‘There is the monk called Bhaddāli, a disciple of the World honored One. He does not fully train in the rules and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One.’” Bhaddāli, at that time did you not recognize this?^91 Bhaddāli, at that time did you not know this: “Many male and female lay disciples live in Sāvatthī. They know me and see me [and they think]: ‘There is the monk called Bhaddāli, a disciple of the World-honored One, who does not fully train in the rules and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One’” Bhaddāli, at that time did you not recognize this? Bhaddāli, at that time did you not know this: “Many heterodox practi tioners, renunciants and brahmins, are spending the rains retreat at Sāvatthī. They know me and see me [and they think]: ‘There is the monk called Bhaddāli, a disciple of the renunciant Gotama, who is reputed for his virtue, and [this disciple] does not fully train in the rules, and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One.’” Bhaddāli, at that time did you not recognize this? Bhaddāli, suppose there is a monk who is liberated in both ways and I tell him: “Come, [lie down] in the mud!”^92 Bhaddāli, what do you think,

[regarding] that monk who has been instructed by me; would that monk stand still or move away? The venerable Bhaddāli replied, “No, [he would not stand still or move away, but would lie down in the mud].” The World-honored One said: Bhaddāli, suppose there is a monk who is not liberated both ways but is lib- erated by wisdom... is not liberated by wisdom but is a body witness... is not a body witness but is one who has arrived at view... not one who has arrived at view but is liberated by faith... is not liberated by faith but is a Dharma follower... is not a Dharma follower but is a faith fol- lower, and I tell him, “Come, [lie down] in the mud!” Bhaddāli, what do you think [regarding] that monk who has been instructed by me; would that monk stand still or move away? The venerable Bhaddāli replied, “No, [he would not stand still or move away, but would lie down in the mud].” The World-honored One said: Bhaddāli, what do you think? At that time were you a faith follower... a Dharma follower... one liberated by faith... one who has arrived at view... a body witness... one who is liberated by wisdom... or one liberated in both ways? The venerable Bhaddāli replied, “No, [I was none of those].” The World-honored One said, “Bhaddāli, at that time were you not like a vacant room?” Then the venerable Bhaddāli, having been rebuked to his face by the World-honored One, was sad and distressed within. He hung his head in silence, unable to reply, as if immersed in thought.^93 Then, having rebuked the venerable Bhaddāli to his face, and wishing to cheer him up again, the World-honored One said:

At that time, Bhaddāli, you lacked the peacefulness with regard to me that comes from faith in the Dharma; you lacked the peacefulness that comes from love for the Dharma; you lacked the peacefulness that comes from being at peace in the Dharma. Why was that?

For the sangha of monks I had promulgated the rule on eating [just] one meal [a day]. All [other] monks in the sangha respectfully trained in that rule, and in the entire sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. You alone said that you could not endure it, rose from your seat, and left. Why was that? It was because you would not fully train in the rules, and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. The venerable Bhaddāli said: It is true. Why is that? The World-honored One had, for the sangha of monks, promulgated the rule on eating [just] one meal [a day]. All [other] monks in the sangha respectfully trained in that rule, and in the entire sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. I alone said that I could not endure it, rose from my seat, and left. Why was that? It was because I would not fully train in the rules, and in the entire sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. May the World-honored One forgive my fault! Having seen my fault, I of myself regret my trans gression. From now on I will be disciplined and will not do it again. The World-honored One said: It is like this, Bhaddāli. You were truly like a fool, like an ignorant person, like one who does not understand, like one who is unskilled. Why is that? For the sangha of monks I had promulgated the rule on eating [just] one meal [a day]. All [other] monks in the sangha respectfully trained in that rule, and in the entire sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World honored One. You alone said that you could not endure it, rose from your seat, and left. Why was that? It was because you would not fully train in the rules, and in the entire sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. Bhaddāli, having committed a transgression, and having seen it, you regret it of yourself, and from now on you will discipline yourself and not do it again. Bhaddāli, in this way within this noble Dharma and dis cipline there is benefit, not decline if, having thus committed a transgres sion, you see it and regret it of yourself, and from now on you discipline yourself and do not do it again.

Bhaddāli, what do you think? Suppose that a monk does not fully train in the rules. He stays in a forest, under a tree in a mountain forest, or he dwells on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to sitting in meditation. Staying in that secluded place, he practices energetically to attain a higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present. Having stayed in that secluded place and practiced energetically to attain peace and happiness,^94 he is censured by the World-honored One for his morality, he is censured by _deva_ s and his wise companions in the holy life, and he is censured by himself for his morality. Being censured by the World-honored One for his morality, being censured by _deva_ s and his wise companions in the holy life, and being censured by himself for his morality, he does not [experience] the arising of delight. Delight not having arisen, joy does not arise. Joy not having arisen, bodily tranquility does not arise. Bodily tranquility not having arisen, he does not experience happiness. Not having experienced happiness, his mind does not become collected. Bhaddāli, a noble disciple whose mind has not become collected will not see as it really is and know it as it really is.^95 Bhaddāli, what do you think? Suppose that a monk trains fully in the rules. He stays in a forest, under a tree in a mountain forest, or he dwells on a lofty crag, in a tranquil place without noise, in seclusion, where there is no evil, where there are no people, a place conducive to seated medi- tation. Staying in that secluded place, he practices energetically to attain a higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present. Having stayed in that secluded place and practiced energetically to attain peace and happiness, he is not censured by the World-honored One for his morality, he is not censured by _deva_ s and his wise companions in the holy life, and he is not censured by himself for his morality. Not being censured by the World-honored One for his morality, not being censured by _deva_ s and his wise companions in the holy life, and not being censured by himself for his morality, he [experiences] the arising of delight. Delight having arisen, joy arises. Joy having arisen, bodily tranquility arises. Bodily tranquility having arisen, he experiences happiness. Having expe- rienced happiness, his mind becomes collected.

Bhaddāli, a noble disciple whose mind has become collected will see as it really is and know as it really is. Having seen as it really is and known as it really is, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] con templation, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion, he dwells having attained the first absorption. Bhaddāli, at that time he is reckoned to have attained the first higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present, which he attains easily, with out difficulty. He dwells happily, without fear, at peace and at ease, which makes for his advance toward nirvana.^96 With the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of con centration, he dwells having attained the second absorption. Bhaddāli, at that time he is reckoned to have attained the second higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present, which he attains easily, with out difficulty. He dwells happily, without fear, at peace and at ease, which makes for his advance toward nirvana. Secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling in equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, expe riencing happiness with the body, he dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mind fulness, a happy abode. Bhaddāli, at that time he is reckoned to have attained the third higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present, which he attains easily, with out difficulty. He dwells happily, without fear, at peace and at ease, which makes for his advance toward nirvana. With the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of rapture and displeasure, with neither-pain-nor-pleasure, with purity of equanimity and mindfulness, he dwells having attained the fourth absorption. Bhaddāli, at that time he is reckoned to have attained the fourth higher state of mind, a happy abiding in the present, which he attains easily, with out difficulty. He dwells happily, without fear, at peace and at ease, which makes for his advance toward nirvana.

With his mind collected and purified in this way, without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, having gained mental imper- turbability, he trains in the realization of the higher knowledge of recol- lection of past lives. He recalls countless former lives traversed by him in the past, together with his activities and appearance [in those lives]: one birth, two births, a hundred births, a thousand births, eons of [world] expansion, eons of [world] contraction, countless eons of [world] expansion and contraction, [recalling], “[I was] that living being named So-and-so; I went through these past experiences, I was born there, with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of food and drink; I experienced this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this. Dying here I was reborn there; dying there I was reborn here. I was reborn here with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of food and drink; I experienced this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this.” Bhaddāli, at that time he is reckoned to have attained this first higher knowledge on the basis of having earlier been without negligence. He delighted in staying in seclusion, and practiced energetically; lack of knowl- edge was eradicated and knowledge arose, darkness was destroyed and understanding accomplished, ignorance was eradicated and understanding arose, namely by realizing the higher knowledge of recollecting past lives. With his mind collected and purified in this way, without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, having gained mental imper- turbability, he trains in the realization of the higher knowledge of the birth and death [of beings]. With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses [the vision of normal] men, he sees beings as they die and are reborn, handsome or ugly, superior or inferior, as they come and go between good and bad realms of existence, in accordance with the [previous] deeds of these living beings. He sees as it really is that, if these living beings practiced evil bodily conduct, evil verbal and mental conduct, if they reviled noble ones, held wrong views, and acted in fulfillment of wrong views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking up of the body, after death, they certainly go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell.

If these living beings practiced excellent bodily conduct, excellent verbal and mental conduct, if they did not revile noble ones, held right views, and acted in fulfillment of right views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking up of the body, after death, they certainly go to a good realm of existence, being reborn in heavenly realms. Bhaddāli, at that time he is reckoned to have attained the second higher knowledge on the basis of having earlier been without negligence. He delighted in staying in seclusion, and practiced energetically; lack of knowledge was eradicated and knowledge arose; darkness was destroyed and understanding accomplished; ignorance was eradicated and under standing arose, namely by realizing the higher knowledge of the birth and death [of beings]. With his mind collected and purified in this way, without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, having gained mental imper turbability, he trains in realizing the higher knowledge of the eradication of the taints. He knows as it really is: “This is dukkha. ” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of dukkha. ” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of dukkha. ” He knows as it really is: “This is the path to the ces sation of dukkha. ” He knows as it really is: “These are the taints.” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of the taints.” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of the taints.” He knows as it really is: “This is the path to the cessation of the taints.” Knowing in this way and seeing in this way, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire... from the taint of existence... and his mind is liberated from the taint of ignorance. It being liberated, he knows it is liberated, knowing as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Bhaddāli, at that time he is reckoned to have attained this third higher knowledge on the basis of having earlier been without negligence. He delighted in staying in seclusion, and practicing energetically; lack of knowl edge was eradicated and knowledge arose; darkness was destroyed and understanding accomplished; ignorance was eradicated and understanding

arose, namely by realizing the higher knowledge of the eradication of the taints. At this the venerable Bhaddāli rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:

World-honored One, what is the cause, what is the reason that monks who have equally violated the rules are in some cases punished and in some cases not punished? The World-honored One replied: Bhaddāli, suppose that a monk has repeatedly violated the rules. Because he has repeatedly violated the rules, he is scolded by his companions in the holy life regarding what has been seen or heard and what is suspected from that. Being scolded by his companions in the holy life regarding what has been seen or heard and what is suspected from that, he speaks evasively about other unrelated matters; or he becomes angry and full of hate, venting fury and wide-ranging hatred; or he harasses the sangha, is disdainful toward the sangha, speaking like this: “I will now [not] do what pleases and satisfies the sangha and is agreeable to it,”^97 expressing this kind of mental attitude. Bhaddāli, the monks then think, “This venerable one has repeatedly violated the rules. Because he has repeatedly violated the rules, he has been scolded by his companions in the holy life regarding what has been seen or heard and what is suspected from that. Being scolded by his com panions in the holy life regarding what has been seen or heard and what has been suspected from that, he speaks evasively about other unrelated matters; or he becomes angry and full of hate, venting fury and wide ranging hatred; or he harasses the sangha, is disdainful toward the sangha, speaking like this: ‘I will now [not] do what pleases and satisfies the sangha and is agreeable to it.’” Having seen this, Bhaddāli, the monks say, “Venerable ones, we should see to it that [this investigation] continues for a long time.” Bhaddāli, in this way the monks see to it that [that inves tigation] continues for a long time.

Suppose that a monk has repeatedly violated the rules. Because he has repeatedly violated the rules, he is scolded by his companions in the holy life regarding what has been seen or heard and what is suspected from that. Being scolded by his companions in the holy life regarding what has been seen or heard and what is suspected from that, he does not speak evasively about other unrelated matters; nor does he become angry and full of hate, venting fury and wide-ranging evil; nor does he harass the sangha, nor is he disdainful toward the sangha. He does not speak like this: “I will now [not] do what pleases and satisfies the sangha and is agreeable to it.” He does not express this kind of mental attitude. Bhaddāli, the monks then think, “This venerable one has repeatedly vio lated the rules. Because he has repeatedly violated the rules, he has been scolded by his companions in the holy life regarding what has been seen or heard and what is suspected from that. Being scolded by his companions in the holy life regarding what has been seen or heard and what is suspected from that, he does not speak evasively about other unrelated matters; nor does he become angry and full of hate, venting fury and wide-ranging evil; nor does he harass the sangha, nor is he disdainful toward the sangha. He does not speak like this: ‘I will now [not] do what pleases and satisfies the sangha and is agreeable to it.’” Having seen this, they say, “Venerable ones, we should see to it that [this investigation] is soon finalized.” Bhaddāli, in this way the monks see to it that [that investigation] is soon finalized. In the case of a light violation of the precepts it is also like this. Bhaddāli, suppose that a monk has [a little] faith and [a little] love [for the Dharma] and is [a little] at peace [in the Dharma].^98 [The examining monks think,] “At present this monk has [a little] faith and [a little] love [for the Dharma] and is [a little] at peace [in the Dharma]. If we punish this venerable one, then because of that the [little] faith and [little] love [for the Dharma] and the state of being [a little] at peace [in the Dharma] of this venerable one will certainly be cut off. Let us now together carefully protect this venerable one.” So the monks together carefully protect him. Bhaddāli, he is just like a person who has <only> one eye.^99 All of his relatives, out of sympathy and concern, seeking his benefit, welfare, peace, and happiness, together carefully protect him, so that this person is not [afflicted] by cold and heat, [afflicted] by hunger and thirst, [afflicted] by

disease, [afflicted] by worry, [afflicted] by disease and worry, so that he is not [afflicted] by dust, not [afflicted] by smoke, not [afflicted] by dust and smoke. Why is that? His relatives carefully protect him because they fear that he might lose that one eye. Bhaddāli, in the same way, when a monk has a little faith and a little love [for the Dharma] and is a little at peace [in the Dharma], [the monks think], “Now this monk has a little faith and a little love [for the Dharma] and is a little at peace [in the Dharma]. If we punish this venerable one, then because of that the little faith and little love [for the Dharma] and the being a little at peace [in the Dharma] of this venerable one will cer- tainly be cut off. Let us now together carefully protect this venerable one.” For this reason the monks together carefully protect him, just as the relatives protect the man with one eye. Then the venerable Bhaddāli rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:

World-honored One, what is the cause, what is the reason that in former times, when few rules had been promulgated, many monks observed and upheld them? What is the cause, what is the reason that now, when the World-honored One has promulgated many rules, few monks observe and uphold them?^100 The World-honored One replied: Bhaddāli, when the sangha of monks had not acquired [worldly] gains, the sangha did not delight in fine things.^101 When the sangha of monks had acquired [worldly] gains, the sangha then found delight in fine things. Delight in fine things having arisen, the World-honored One, wishing to cut off this delight in fine things, established rules for his disciples. In the same way for becoming very famous... elders becoming known to the king... being of great merit... having much learning.^102 Bhaddāli, when the sangha did not yet have much learning, the sangha did not delight in fine things. When the sangha came to be of much learn ing, the sangha came to delight in fine things. Delight in fine things having

arisen, the World-honored One, wishing to cut off this delight in fine things, promulgated rules for his disciples. Bhaddāli, I establish rules for disciples not [just] for the sake of cutting off taints in the present. I establish rules for disciples [also] for the sake of cutting off taints in the future. Therefore, Bhaddāli, I establish rules for disciples for the sake of cutting off taints, leading them to accept my instruction. Bhaddāli, long ago I gave the monks a teaching with the simile of a thor oughbred horse. What is the reason herein that you do not remember?^103 The venerable Bhaddāli said: World-honored One, there was a reason here. What was it? The World honored One had promulgated the rule on eating [just] one meal [a day] for the monks. All of the monks in the sangha respectfully trained in that rule, and in the sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. I alone said that I could not endure it, rose from my seat and left. That was because I did not fully train in the rules and in the entire sublime Dharma, which is the domain of the World-honored One. Herein, World honored One, this was the reason. The World-honored One said further: Bhaddāli, this was not the only reason here. Bhaddāli, when I gave the monks the teaching with the simile of the thoroughbred horse, you certainly did not attend to it single-mindedly, you did not respect it well, you did not listen with attention. Bhaddāli, there was another reason here. Then the venerable Bhaddāli rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said: World-honored One, now is the right time. Well-gone One, now is the right time for the World-honored One to give the monks the teaching with the simile of the thoroughbred horse. Having heard it from the World honored One, the monks will receive it and remember it well.^104 The World-honored One said:

Bhaddāli, it is just as a knowledgeable horse trainer gets a fine thoroughbred horse [and subdues it]. That knowledgeable [horse] trainer first subdues its mouth [with the bit]. Having had its mouth subdued, the horse is not happy about moving around. At times it wants [to move]; at times it does not want to. Why is that? Because it has not yet been [fully] subdued. Bhaddāli, once the fine thoroughbred horse has been subdued by the trainer [by means of the bit], the first [stage of] subduing has been accom- plished. The horse trainer then subdues it to wearing the harness and keep- ing in step. Once trained in wearing the harness and keeping in step, it is made to gallop. [Finally] it is made to attack.^105 It is then fit for a king to ride, being of the highest rank. [Before] it had been perfectly pacified and subdued in all respects, and made thoroughly familiar with the trainer’s commands, [the horse] was not happy about moving around, at times wanting [to move], at times not wanting to. Why is that? It is because it was being subdued by stages. Bhaddāli, once the horse trainer has accomplished the process of subduing it by stages, at that time the fine thoroughbred horse is tamed, well-tamed. It has attained the highest taming, the foremost and highest taming, the highest rank. Having attained the foremost rank, it is then suitable to be ridden by a king, to be fed with royal fodder, and to be called a royal horse. Bhaddāli, in the same way, when a noble, fine, and knowledgeable per- son has accomplished the ten stages of one beyond training—the right view of one beyond training... up to... the right knowledge of one beyond training—at that time he is tamed, well-tamed. He has attained the highest taming, attained the foremost and highest taming, the highest tranquility. He has attained the foremost tranquility. He has discarded all crookedness, discarded all impurity, discarded all fear, discarded all delu- sion, discarded all flattery, settled all dust, washed away all filth, and he is without attachment. He is worthy of reverence, worthy of esteem, worthy of respect, worthy of offerings, an excellent field of merit for all _deva_ s and human beings. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Bhaddāli and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma194-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA49.7]], [[MA192]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[JA371]], [[MA72]], [[EA24.8]], [[JA428]], [[PLI-TV-KD10]], [[DHP\|DHP3]], [[DHP\|DHP328]], [[SNP1.3]], [[DHP\|DHP329]], [[DHP\|DHP330]], [[DHP\|DHP4]], [[DHP\|DHP5]], [[DHP\|DHP6]], [[THAG4]].3, [[THAG8]].1, [[UD5.9]], [[MN31]], [[MA185]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN107]], [[SN16.13]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA194]]
> ◄  [[ma193-bdk]] 📜  [[ma195-bdk]] ►
