---
sutta_code: "MA190"
sutta_title:
  - "小空 "
  - "Emptiness Shorter Discourse"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA190]]
> ◄  [[ma189-bdk]] 📜  [[ma191-bdk]] ►

### 190. The Shorter Discourse on Emptiness

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Hall of Migāra’s Mother. At that time, in the afternoon, the venerable Ānanda rose from sitting in meditation and approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet, he stepped back, stood to one side, and said: Once the World-honored One was dwelling among the Sakyans, in a town of the Sakyans called Nagaraka. At that time I heard the World-honored One say this: “Ānanda, I dwell much in emptiness.” Have I understood well, received well, and remembered well that statement by the World honored One? Then the World-honored One replied: Ānanda, you truly have understood well, received well, and remembered well that statement by me. Why is that? From then until now I dwell much in emptiness.

Ānanda, it is just as this Hall of Migāra’s Mother is empty of elephants, of horses, of oxen, of sheep, of goods, of grain, and of servants. What it is not empty of, however, is just a sangha of monks. Thus, Ānanda, what- ever is not present here, I therefore view as empty; and whatever remains present here, I see as truly present. Ānanda, this is called dwelling in true emptiness, without distortion. Ānanda, if a monk wishes to dwell much in emptiness, then that monk should not give attention to the perception of a village and not give attention to the perception of people, but should frequently give attention to the unitary perception of [this] forest. In this way he knows that this is empty of the perception of a village and empty of the perception of people. Yet there is nonemptiness, which is just the unitary perception of a forest. [He knows:] “Whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of a village, for me that is not present; and whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of people, for me that too is not present. There is just the dis- turbance caused by the unitary perception of a forest.” Whatever is not present here, he therefore sees as empty; whatever else is present here, he sees as truly present. Ānanda, this is called dwelling in true emptiness, without distortion. Again, Ānanda, if a monk wishes to dwell much in emptiness, that monk should not give attention to the perception of people and not give attention to the perception of a forest, but should frequently give attention to the unitary perception of earth. If that monk sees this earth as having hills and hollows, with groups of snakes, with clumps of thornbushes, with sand and rocks, steep mountain slopes and deep rivers, then he should not attend to it in that way. If [instead] he sees this earth as level and flat like the palm of his hand, then his manner of looking at it is beneficial and should be attended to frequently. Ānanda, it is just as a cow hide, when stretched and fastened with a hundred pegs, fully stretched, has no wrinkles and no creases. [Similarly], if he sees this earth as having hills and hollows, with groups of snakes, with clumps of thornbushes, with sand and rocks, steep mountains and deep rivers, then he should not attend to it in that way. If [instead] he sees this earth as level and flat like the palm of his hand, then his manner of looking at it is beneficial and should be attended to frequently.

In this way he knows that this is empty of the perception of people and empty of the perception of a forest. Yet there is nonemptiness, which is just the unitary perception of earth. [He knows:] “Whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of people, for me that is not present; whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of a forest, for me that too is not present. There exists only the disturbance caused by the unitary perception of earth.” Whatever is not present here, he therefore sees as empty; whatever else is present there, he sees as truly present. Ānanda, this is called dwelling in true emptiness, without distortion. Again, Ānanda, if a monk wishes to dwell much in emptiness, that monk should not give attention to the perception of a forest and not give attention to the perception of earth, but should frequently give attention to the unitary perception of the sphere of infinite space. In this way he knows that this is empty of the perception of a forest and empty of the perception of earth. Yet there is nonemptiness, which is just the unitary perception of the sphere of infinite space. [He knows:] “Whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of a forest, for me that is not present; whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of earth, for me that too is not present. There exists only the disturbance caused by the unitary perception of the sphere of infinite space.” Whatever is not present there, he therefore sees as empty; whatever else is there, he sees as truly present. Ānanda, this is called dwelling in true emptiness, without distortion. Again, Ānanda, if a monk wishes to dwell much in emptiness, that monk should not give attention to the perception of earth and not give attention to the perception of the sphere of infinite space, but should fre quently give attention to the unitary perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness. In this way he knows that this is empty of the perception of earth and empty of the perception of the sphere of infinite space. Yet there is non emptiness, which is just the unitary perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness. [He knows:] “Whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of earth, for me that is not present; whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of the sphere of infinite space, for

me that too is not present. There exists only the disturbance caused by the unitary perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness.” Whatever is not present there, he therefore sees as empty; whatever else is present there, he sees as truly present. Ānanda, this is called dwelling in true emptiness, without distortion. Again, Ānanda, if a monk wishes to dwell much in emptiness, that monk should not give attention to the perception of the sphere of infinite space and not give attention to the perception of the sphere of infinite con- sciousness, but should frequently give attention to the unitary perception of the sphere of nothingness. In this way he knows that this is empty of the perception of the sphere of infinite space and empty of the perception of the sphere of infinite con- sciousness. Yet there is nonemptiness, which is just the unitary perception of the sphere of nothingness. [He knows:] “Whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of the sphere of infinite space, for me that is not present; whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness, for me that too is not present. There exists only the disturbance caused by the unitary perception of the sphere of nothingness.” Whatever is not present there, he therefore sees as empty; whatever else is there, he sees as truly present. Ānanda, this is called dwelling in true emptiness, without distortion.^48 Again, Ānanda, if a monk wishes to dwell much in emptiness, that monk should not give attention to the perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness and not give attention to the perception of the sphere of nothingness, but should frequently give attention to the unitary samādhi of mind.^49 In this way he knows that this is empty of the perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness and empty of the perception of the sphere of noth- ingness. Yet there is nonemptiness, which is just the unitary con- centration of mind. [He knows:] “Whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of the sphere of infinite consciousness, for me that is not present; whatever disturbance there might be, caused by perception of the sphere of nothingness, for me that too is not present. There exists only the disturbance caused by the samādhi of mind.”

Whatever is not present there, he therefore sees as empty; whatever else is present there, he sees as truly present. Ānanda, this is called dwelling in true emptiness, without distortion. He thinks: “My [experience] of <signless> samādhi of mind is rooted, it is rooted in formations, it is rooted in intentions. What is rooted in formations, rooted in intentions, I do not delight in that, I do not seek that, I should not dwell in that.”^50 Knowing like this and seeing like this, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance. Being liberated, he knows he is liberated. He knows as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” In this way he knows that this is empty of the taint of sensual desire, empty of the taint of existence, and empty of the taint of ignorance. Yet there is nonemptiness, which is just this body with the six sense spheres and the life faculty. [He knows:] “Whatever disturbance there might be, caused by the taint of sensual desire, for me that is not present; whatever disturbance there might be, caused by the taint of existence... caused by the taint of ignorance, for me that too is not present. There exists only the disturbance caused by this body of mine with the six sense spheres and the life faculty.” Whatever is not present there, he therefore sees as empty; whatever else is present there, he sees as truly present. Ānanda, this is called dwelling in true emptiness, without distortion, namely eradication of the taints, the taintless and unconditioned liberation of the mind.^51 Ānanda, whatever tathāgatas, free from attachment and fully awakened, there have been in the past, they all dwelled in this true emptiness, without distortion, namely the eradication of the taints, the taintless and uncon ditioned liberation of the mind.^52 Ānanda, whatever tathāgatas, free from attachment and fully awakened, there will be in the future, they will all dwell in this true emptiness, without distortion, namely the eradication of the taints, the taintless and uncon ditioned liberation of the mind. Ānanda, I, who am the Tathāgata now, free from attachment and fully awakened, I too dwell in this true emptiness, without distortion, namely

the eradication of the taints, the taintless and unconditioned liberation of the mind. Ānanda, you should train like this: “I too shall dwell in this true emptiness, without distortion, namely the eradication of the taints, the taintless and unconditioned liberation of the mind.” Ānanda, you should train like this. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Ānanda and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma190-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN9.42]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA190]]
> ◄  [[ma189-bdk]] 📜  [[ma191-bdk]] ►
