---
sutta_code: "MA204"
sutta_title:
  - "羅摩 "
  - "At Rammaka’s [Hermitage]"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA204]]
> ◄  [[ma203-bdk]] 📜  [[ma205-bdk]] ►

### 204. The Discourse at Rammaka’s [Hermitage]

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, in the Eastern Park, at the Hall of Migāra’s Mother. At that time, in the afternoon, the World-honored One emerged from sitting in meditation, came down from the hall and said to the venerable Ānanda, “Accompanied by you I would now go to the Aciravatī River to bathe.”^238 The venerable Ānanda replied, “Yes, certainly.”

The venerable Ānanda took a door opener and went around all of the huts. To all the monks he saw he said this: “Venerable friends, you should all gather at the house of the brahmin Rammaka.” On hearing this, the monks gathered at the house of the brahmin Rammaka. The World-honored One, followed by the venerable Ānanda, went to the Aciravatī River. He took off his robes, placed them on the bank, and entered the water to bathe. Having bathed, he came out again, wiped his body [dry], and put on his robes. At that time the venerable Ānanda was standing behind the World-honored One, holding a fan to fan him. Then the venerable Ānanda extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said:

World-honored One, the house of the brahmin Rammaka is very pleasant and orderly. It is truly delightful. May the World-honored One, out of compassion, go to the house of the brahmin Rammaka. The World-honored One accepted the venerable Ānanda’s [invitation] by remaining silent. Then the World-honored One, followed by the venerable Ānanda, went to the house of the brahmin Rammaka. At that time a group of many monks were seated together in the house of the brahmin Rammaka discussing the Dharma. The Buddha stood outside the door, waiting for the monks to finish their discussion of the Dharma. The group of many monks, having completed their investigation and discussion of the Dharma, remained silent. Knowing this, the World-honored One coughed and knocked on the door. Hearing this, the monks came and opened the door. The World-honored One entered the house of the brahmin Rammaka and sat down on a seat that had been prepared in front of the group of monks. He asked them, “What have you just been discussing, monks? For what matter are you sitting together here?” Then the monks replied, “World-honored One, we have just been discussing the Dharma. It is for a matter of Dharma that we are sitting together here.” The Buddha commended them: It is well, it is well, monks, sitting together you should engage in [either of] two things: the first is discussing the Dharma; the second is remaining

silent. Why is that? I too shall teach you the Dharma. Listen closely and pay proper attention!

The monks replied: “Yes, certainly. We shall listen to receive instruction.” The Buddha said:

There are two types of search: the first is called the noble search; the second is called the ignoble search. What is the ignoble search? Someone, being actually subject to disease, seeks what is [also] subject to disease; being actually subject to old age... subject to death... subject to worry and sadness... being actually subject to defilement, they seek what is [also] subject to defilement.^239 What is being actually subject to disease yet seeking what is [also] subject to disease? What is subject to disease? Sons and brothers are subject to disease; elephants, horses, cattle, sheep, male and female slaves, wealth, treasures, rice and [other] cereals are subject to disease and destruc- tion. Living beings, stained and touched by greed and attachment, full of pride, take hold of and enter amid these, without seeing the danger and without seeing an escape, clinging to them and engaging with them. What is subject to old age... subject to death... subject to worry and sadness... subject to defilement? Sons and brothers are subject to defile- ment; elephants, horses, cattle, sheep, male and female slaves, wealth, treasures, rice and cereals are subject to defilement and destruction.^240 Living beings, stained and touched by greed and attachment, intoxicated with pride, take hold of and enter amid these, without seeing the danger and without seeing an escape, clinging to them and engaging with them. That such a person, wanting and seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease should attain the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease—that is not possible. [That such a person, wanting and] seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement, should attain the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement—that is not possible. This [kind of seeking] is what is meant by the ignoble search.

What is the noble search? Someone reflects, “I am actually subject to disease myself and I am naively seeking what is [also] subject to disease, I am actually subject to old age... subject to death... subject to worry and sadness... subject to defilement myself and I am naively seeking what is [also] subject to defilement. Let me now rather seek the unsur passable peace of nirvana that is free from disease, seek the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement!” That such a person, seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease, should attain the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease—that is certainly possible. [That such a person], seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement, should attain the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement— that is certainly possible. Formerly, when I had not yet awakened to the unsurpassable, right, and complete awakening, I thought like this: “I am actually subject to dis ease myself and I am naively seeking what is [also] subject to disease, I am actually subject to old age... subject to death... subject to worry and sadness... subject to defilement myself and I am naively seeking what is [also] subject to defilement. Let me now rather seek the unsur passable peace of nirvana that is free from disease, seek the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement!” At that time I was a young lad, with clear [complexion] and black hair, in the prime of life, twenty-nine years of age, roaming around well adorned and enjoying myself to the utmost. Then, as my father and mother cried and my relatives lamented, I shaved off my hair and beard, donned yellow robes, and out of faith went forth from the household life to train in the path. I maintained purity of livelihood in body, I maintained purity of livelihood in speech and in mind.^241 Having accomplished this aggregate of morality, aspiring for and seek ing the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease... free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... the

unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from defilement, I approached Āḷāra Kālāma. I asked him, “Āḷāra, I wish to practice the holy life in your Dharma. Will you permit it?” Āḷāra answered me, saying, “Venerable one, I certainly permit it. Prac- tice as you wish to practice!” I asked further, “Āḷāra, this Dharma of yours—have you come to know it yourself, to understand it yourself, and to realize it yourself?”^242 Āḷāra answered me, saying, “Venerable one, completely transcending the sphere of [boundless] consciousness, I attain and dwell in the sphere of nothingness. Therefore, I have come to know this Dharma of mine myself, to understand it myself, and to realize it myself.” I thought again, “Not only Āḷāra alone has such faith; I too have such faith. Not only Āḷāra alone has such energy; I too have such energy. Not only Āḷāra alone has such wisdom; I too have such wisdom.^243 [With these qualities] Āḷāra has come to know this Dharma himself, to understand it himself, to realize it himself.” Because I wished to realize this Dharma, I went and dwelled alone and in seclusion in an empty and quiet place. With a mind free from indolence I practiced energetically. Having dwelled alone and in seclusion in an empty and quiet place, with a mind free from indolence, practicing ener- getically, in no long time I realized that Dharma. Having realized that Dharma, I again approached Āḷāra Kālāma and asked him, “Āḷāra, is this the Dharma that you have come to know yourself, to understand yourself, to realize yourself, namely: completely transcending the sphere of boundless consciousness to attain and dwell in the sphere of nothingness?” Āḷāra Kālāma answered me, saying, “Venerable one, this is [indeed] the Dharma that I have come to know myself, to understand myself, to realize myself, namely: completely transcending the sphere of [boundless] consciousness to attain and dwell in the sphere of nothingness.” Āḷāra Kālāma further said to me, “Venerable one, just as I have realized this Dharma, so too have you; just as you have realized this Dharma, so too have I. Venerable one, come and share the leadership of this group!” Thus Āḷāra Kālāma, being the teacher, placed me on an equal level, [thereby] giving me the highest respect, the highest support, and the highest appreciation.

I thought again, “This Dharma does not lead to knowledge, does not lead to awakening, does not lead to nirvana. Let me rather leave this Dharma now and continue seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease... free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from defilement.” I then abandoned this Dharma and continued seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease... free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from defilement. I approached Uddaka Rāmaputta and asked him, “Uddaka, I wish to train in your Dharma, will you permit it?” Uddaka Rāmaputta answered me saying, “Venerable one, I certainly permit it. Train as you wish to train!” I asked him further, “Uddaka, your father, Rāma^244 —what Dharma did he come to know himself, to understand himself, to realize himself?” Uddaka Rāmaputta answered me, saying, “Venerable one, completely transcending the sphere of nothingness, he attained and dwelled in the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception. Venerable sir, what my father Rāma knew himself, understood himself, realized himself, was this Dharma.” I thought again, “Not only Rāma alone had such faith; I too have such faith. Not only Rāma alone had such energy; I too have such energy. Not only Rāma alone had such wisdom; I too have such wisdom. [With these qualities] Rāma came to know this Dharma himself, to understand it him self, to realize it himself. Why should I not get to know this Dharma myself, to understand it myself, to realize it myself?” Because I wished to realize this Dharma, I went and dwelled alone and in seclusion, in an empty and quiet place. With a mind free from indolence, I practiced energetically. Having dwelled alone and in seclusion, in an empty and quiet place, with a mind free from indolence, practicing ener getically, in no long time I realized that Dharma. Having realized that Dharma, I again approached Uddaka Rāmaputta and asked him, “Uddaka, is this the Dharma that your father Rāma came to know himself, to understand himself, to realize himself, namely: com pletely transcending the sphere of nothingness to attain and dwell in the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception?”

Uddaka Rāmaputta answered me, saying, “Venerable one, this is [indeed] the Dharma that my father Rāma came to know himself, to under- stand himself, and to realize himself, namely: completely transcending the sphere of nothingness to attain and dwell in the sphere of neither-per- ception-nor-nonperception.” Uddaka Rāmaputta further said to me, “Venerable one, just as my father Rāma realized this Dharma, so too have you; just as you have realized this Dharma, so too did my father. Venerable one, come and share the leadership of this group!”^245 Thus Uddaka Rāmaputta, being the teacher, regarded me also as a teacher, thereby giving me the highest respect, the highest support, and the highest appreciation. I thought again, “This Dharma does not lead to knowledge, does not lead to awakening, does not lead to nirvana. Let me rather leave this Dharma now and continue seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease... free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from defilement.” I then left this Dharma and continued to seek the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease... free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... the unsurpassable peace of nir- vana that is free from defilement. I went to a brahmin village called Senā near Uruvelā, south of Elephant Peak Mountain. That area was truly delightful. The mountain forest was lush and the Nerañjarā River was clear and running full up to its banks. On seeing it, I thought, “This place is truly delightful. The mountain forest is lush and the Nerañjarā River is clear and running full up to its banks. If a clansman wished to train, he could train here. I shall be training, [so] let me now train here!” [After training], I then took some grass and approached the tree of awakening. On reaching it, I spread out [the grass as] a sitting mat and sat down cross-legged with the determination not to break off my sitting until the taints had been eradicated.^246 I [indeed] did not break off my sitting until the taints had been eradicated. Seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease, I attained the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease.

Seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement, I attained the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement. Knowl edge arose, vision arose, as I established the requisites of awakening. I knew as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.”^247 Having just awakened to the unsurpassable, right and complete awak ening, I thought, “To whom should I first teach the Dharma?” I further thought, “Should I now first teach the Dharma to Āḷāra Kālāma?” At that time there was a deva up in the sky, who said to me, “Great Sage, may you know this: Āḷāra Kālāma passed away seven days ago.” I too came to know myself that Āḷāra Kālāma had passed away seven days ago. I thought again, “It is a great loss for Āḷāra Kālāma that he did not get to hear this Dharma. If he had heard it, he would have quickly understood the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma.” Having just awakened to the unsurpassable, right, and complete awak ening, I thought, “To whom should I first teach the Dharma?” I further thought, “Should I now first teach the Dharma to Uddaka Rāmaputta?” There was again a deva up in the sky, who said to me: “Great Sage, may you know this: Uddaka Rāmaputta passed away fourteen days ago.”^248 I also came to know myself that Uddaka Rāmaputta had passed away fourteen days ago.^249 I thought again:, “It is a great loss for Uddaka Rāma putta that he did not get to hear this Dharma. If he had heard it, he would have quickly understood the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma.” Having just awakened to the unsurpassable, right, and complete awak ening, I thought, “To whom should I first teach the Dharma?” I further thought, “The five monks of former times, who supported me in my efforts, were of much benefit [to me]. When I was practicing asceticism, those five monks served me. Should I now first teach the Dharma to the five monks?” I further thought, “The five monks of former times—where are they now?” With the purified divine eye that transcends [the vision] of human beings I saw that the five monks were in the Deer Park at the dwelling place of seers near Benares. After staying under the tree of awakening [as

long as I wished], I gathered my robes, took my bowl, and headed toward Benares, the city of Kāsi. At that time the heterodox practitioner Upaka, on seeing me coming in the distance, said to me, “Venerable Gotama, your faculties are clear and calm, your appearance is sublime, your face shines with a [bright] radiance. Venerable Gotama, who is your teacher? Under whom do you train in the path? In whose Dharma have you [placed] your faith?” Then I answered Upaka in verse:

I am the supreme victor, Not attached to anything, Completely liberated from all craving. Having awakened on my own, whom should I call teacher? None is my equal, none my superior. I have awakened on my own to the unsurpassable awakening. [I am] the Tathāgata, teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, Complete in understanding, accomplished in power.” Upaka asked me, “Venerable Gotama, do you call yourself a victor?” Again I answered him in verse:

Victors are like this, That is, they have eradicated all taints. I have destroyed all evil states; Therefore, Upaka, I am [indeed] a victor. Upaka again asked me, “Venerable Gotama, where are you wishing to go?” Then I answered him in verse:

I am going to Benares, To beat the sublime drum of the deathless, To set in motion the unsurpassable wheel of the Dharma, Which has never before been set in motion in the world.^250 Upaka said to me, “Venerable Gotama, it may be so.” Having spoken like this, he turned around and left by a side path.^251 I went on by myself to the Deer Park at the dwelling place of seers.

At that time the five monks, having seen me coming in the distance, had come to an agreement among themselves, saying, “Venerable friends, [you] should know that this renunciant Gotama is coming. He is of many desires, many longings. He partakes of fine food and drink, being fond of cereals, rice, and cakes with ghee and honey; and he applies sesame oil to his body. Now that he is coming back here, let us just remain seated, taking care not to stand up to greet him and not to pay homage to him. Have one seat ready, but do not invite him to sit down. When he arrives, say, ‘Friend, if you wish to sit down, do as you wish.’” Then I arrived at where the five monks were. At that time the five were unable to disregard my extremely dignified bearing and promptly got up from their seats. Some took my robe and bowl, some set out a seat, and some brought water, wishing to wash my feet. I thought, “These confused men! Why are they so irresolute? Having themselves set up a rule, they go against their original decision.”^252 Knowing this, I sat on the seat pre pared by the five monks. At that time the five monks were addressing me by my family name and calling me “friend.” I told them, “Five monks, I am a tathāgata, free from attachment, rightly and fully awakened. You should not address me by my former family name and should not call me ‘friend.’ Why is that? Seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease, I have attained the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease. Seeking the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement, I have attained the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement. I know as it really is: ‘Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.’” They said to me, “Friend Gotama, formerly you had such a mode of training, followed such a path, and undertook such ascetic practices, yet you were unable to attain superhuman states distinguished by noble knowl edge and noble vision. How then could you do so now, when you have many desires and many longings, partaking of fine food and drink, being

fond of cooked cereals and rice and cakes with ghee and honey, and apply- ing sesame oil to your body?”^253 I said to them, “Five monks, formerly did you ever see me like this, with my faculties so clear, calm, and shining with a bright radiance?”^254 Then the five monks answered me, saying, “Formerly, friend, we did not see your faculties so clear, calm, and shining with a bright radiance. [But] now, friend Gotama, your faculties are [indeed] clear and calm, your appearance is sublime, and your face does shine with a bright radiance.” I then addressed them, saying,^255 “Five monks, you should know that there are two extreme practices that those on the path should not cultivate. The first is attachment to sensual pleasures, which is a low activity practiced by worldly persons. The second is self-tormenting, [inflicting] pain on oneself, which is an ignoble state and is not connected with what is ben- eficial.^256 Five monks, giving up these two extremes, take the middle path that accomplishes vision, accomplishes knowledge, accomplishes certainty, and brings mastery, which leads to knowledge, leads to awakening, and leads to nirvana. It is the eightfold right path: right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight.” Wishing to instruct the five monks by turns, I instructed and guided two of them, while the other three went begging for almsfood. The food brought back by the three was sufficient for the six [of us] to eat. [Then] I instructed and guided [those] three, while the other two went begging for almsfood. The food brought back by the two was sufficient for the six [of us] to eat. Being taught by me like this and guided like this, seeking the unsur- passable peace of nirvana that is free from disease, they attained the unsur- passable peace of nirvana that is free from disease. Seeking the unsurpass- able peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement, they attained the unsur- passable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement. Knowledge and vision arose in them and they established the requisites of awakening. They knew as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.”

Then the World-honored One instructed them further, “Five monks, there are the five strands of sensual pleasure, which are desirable, agreeable, recalled by the mind, and connected with delight and sensuality. What are the five? Visible forms known by the eye, sounds known by the ear, odors known by the nose, flavors known by the tongue, and tangibles known by the body. “Five monks, [consider] an unlearned ignorant worldling who does not visit good [Dharma] friends, who has not understood the noble Dharma and is not guided by the noble Dharma. Being touched [by these five strands of sensual pleasure], he is polluted by greed and attachment [for them]. Conceited, he accepts them, not seeing the danger [in them], not seeing an escape [from them], but grasping at them and engaging with them. You should know that he is at the mercy of Māra, the Evil One; he is under the power of Māra, the Evil One; he has fallen into the hands of Māra, the Evil One. Bound by Māra’s net, bound in Māra’s bonds, he is unable to escape from Māra’s bonds. “Five monks, he is just like a wild deer that is bound by bonds. You should know that it is at the mercy of the hunter, under the power of the hunter. Having fallen into the hands of the hunter, bound by the hunter’s net, it is unable to escape when the hunter comes. “It is the same, five monks, with an unlearned ignorant worldling who does not visit good [Dharma] friends, who has not understood the noble Dharma, and is not guided by the noble Dharma. Being touched by these five strands of sensual pleasure, he is polluted by greed and attachment [for them]. Conceited, he accepts them, not seeing the danger [in them] and not seeing an escape [from them], but grasping at them and engaging with them. You should know that he is at the mercy of Māra, the Evil One; he is under the power of Māra, the Evil One; he has fallen into the hands of Māra, the Evil One. Bound by Māra’s net, bound by Māra’s bonds, he is unable to escape from Māra’s bonds. “Five monks, [consider] a learned noble disciple who does visit good [Dharma] friends, who has understood the noble Dharma and moreover is guided by the noble Dharma. Not being touched by the five strands of sensual pleasure, he is not polluted, having no greed and no attachment in regard to them. Not being conceited, he does not grasp at them or engage

with them, [instead] seeing the danger [in them] and seeing the escape from them. You should know that he is not at the mercy of Māra, the Evil One; not under the power of Māra, the Evil One; he has not fallen into the hands of Māra, the Evil One. Not bound by Māra’s net, not bound in Māra’s bonds, he is able to escape from Māra’s bonds. “Five monks, he is just like a wild deer that has escaped from its bonds. You should know that it is not at the mercy of the hunter, not under the power of the hunter. Not having fallen into the hands of the hunter, not bound by the hunter’s net, it is able to escape when the hunter comes. “It is the same, five monks, with the learned noble disciple who visits good [Dharma] friends, who has understood the noble Dharma, and more- over is guided by the noble Dharma. Not being touched by the five strands of sensual pleasure, he is not polluted by greed and attachment in regard to them. Not being conceited,^257 he does not grasp at them or engage with them, [instead] seeing the danger [in them] and seeing the escape from them. You should know that he is not at the mercy of Māra, the Evil One; not under the power of Māra, the Evil One; he has not fallen into the hands of Māra, the Evil One. Not bound by Māra’s net, not bound in Māra’s bonds, he escapes from Māra’s bonds. “Five monks, there is a time when there appears in the world a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, knower of the world, unsurpassable person, leader on the path of Dharma, teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, a buddha, an exalted one.^258 “[A monk] abandons... up to... the five hindrances, which defile the mind and weaken wisdom. Secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states... up to... he dwells having attained the fourth absorption. “With his mind collected and purified in this way, without defile- ment, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, having attained imper- turbability, he directs his mind to the realization of the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints.^259 He knows as it really is: ‘This is _dukkha._ ’ He knows [as it really is]: ‘This is the arising of _dukkha._ ’ He knows [as it really is]: ‘This is the cessation of _dukkha._ ’ He knows as it really is: ‘This is the path to the cessation of _dukkha._ ’

“He knows as it really is: ‘These are the taints.’ He knows [as it really is]: ‘This is the arising of the taints.’ He knows [as it really is]: ‘This is the cessation of the taints.’ He knows as it really is: ‘This is the path to the cessation of the taints.’ “Knowing like this, seeing like this, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire... from the taint of existence, his mind is liberated from the taint of ignorance. It being liberated, he knows it is liberated, knowing as it really is: ‘Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.’ “At that time he is at ease when walking, at ease when standing, at ease when sitting, and at ease when reclining. Why is that? He sees within himself that the countless evil and unwholesome states have been eradi cated. For this reason he is at ease when walking, at ease when standing, at ease when sitting, and at ease when reclining. “Five monks, it is just as, in a secluded spot, a place without people, there might be a wild deer which is at ease when walking, at ease when standing, at ease when sitting, and at ease when reclining. Why is that? That wild deer is not within the range of a hunter. It is for this reason that it is at ease when walking, at ease when standing, at ease when sitting, and at ease when reclining.^260 “Five monks, [in the same way] a monk who, through eradication of the taints, dwells having attained the taint-free liberation of the mind and liberation through wisdom knows it himself, understands it himself, and realizes it himself. He knows as it really is: ‘Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.’ At that time he is at ease when walking, at ease when standing, at ease when sitting, and at ease when reclining. Why is that? He sees within himself that the countless evil and unwholesome states have been eradicated. It is for this reason that he is at ease when walking, at ease when standing, at ease when sitting, and at ease when reclining. “Five monks, this is called liberation without remainder, this is called the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from disease, the unsurpassable peace of nirvana that is free from old age... free from death... free from worry and sadness... free from defilement.”

Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Ānanda and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma204-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA19.1]], [[EA19.2]], [[EA24.5]], [[SA379]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DHP\|DHP125]], [[JA367]], [[SN7.4]], [[SNP3.10]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN141]], [[SN22.87]], [[SN5.15]], [[UD2.10]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA204]]
> ◄  [[ma203-bdk]] 📜  [[ma205-bdk]] ►
