---
sutta_code: "MA206"
sutta_title:
  - "心穢 "
  - "Mental Defilements"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA206]]
> ◄  [[ma205-bdk]] 📜  [[ma207-bdk]] ►

### 206. The Discourse on Mental Defilements

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One said to the monks: If a monk or a nun does not uproot five defilements in the mind and does not unfasten five shackles in the mind, then I say that this monk or nun will certainly regress in the Dharma. What are the five defilements that have not been uprooted in the mind? Suppose that someone is doubtful about the World-honored One, hes- itant, [and thus] does not open the mind, does not release the mind, does not allow the mind to become quiet. If someone is doubtful about the World-honored One, hesitant, [and thus] does not open the mind, does not release the mind, does not allow the mind to become quiet, then this is the first mental defilement that has not been uprooted, namely the one relating to the World-honored One. It is the same for [being doubtful about] the Dharma... the pre- cepts^271... the instructions... suppose that someone is [doubtful about]

companions in the holy life who are praised by the World-honored One. If someone frequently reproves them, devalues them, annoys them, and encroaches on them, [and thus] does not open the mind, does not release the mind, does not allow the mind to become quiet, then this is the fifth mental defilement that has not been uprooted, namely the one relating to companions in the holy life. What are the five shackles in the mind that have not been unfastened?^272 Suppose that someone is not separated from pollution regarding the body, not separated from sensual desire, not separated from craving, not separated from thirst. If he is not separated from pollution regarding the body, not separated from sensual desire, not separated from craving, not separated from thirst, then his mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and on his own impulse he breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and if on his own impulse he breaks off his meditation practice, then this is the first shackle in the mind that has not been unfastened, namely the one regarding the body. Again, [suppose that] someone is not separated from pollution regarding sensuality, not separated from sensual desire, not separated from craving, not separated from thirst. If he is not separated from pollution regarding sensuality, not separated from sensual desire, not separated from craving, not separated from thirst, then his mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and on his own impulse he breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and if on his own impulse he breaks off his meditation practice, then this is the second shackle in the mind that has not been unfastened, namely the one regarding sensuality. Again, [he heard when] someone [else] engages in talk that is noble and connected with benefit, that is gentle and free from the hindrance of doubt, namely talk about morality, talk about samādhi, talk about wisdom, talk about liberation, talk about knowledge and vision of liberation, talk about lessening, talk about not socializing, talk about fewness of wants, talk about contentment, talk about abandoning, talk about dispassion, talk about

cessation, talk about meditation practice, talk about dependent arising, such talk [appropriate for] monks and renunciants. [Hearing it] his mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and on his own impulse he breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and if on his own impulse he breaks off his med- itation practice, then this is the third shackle in the mind that has not been unfastened, namely the one regarding [receptiveness to appropriate] talk. Again, someone frequently talks with the common people and associates with them, is disorderly, haughty, and without learning. If someone fre- quently talks with the common people and associates with them, is dis- orderly, haughty, and without learning, then his mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and on his own impulse he breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and if on his own impulse he breaks off his meditation practice, then this is the fourth shackle in the mind that has not been unfas- tened, namely the one regarding association. Again, because of having attained a little, he settles for that and does not seek to progress further. If because of having attained a little, someone settles for that and does not seek to progress further, then his mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and on his own impulse he breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind does not progress, does not become quiet, does not become still, does not become released, and if on his own impulse he breaks off his meditation practice, then this is the fifth shackle in the mind that has not been unfastened, namely the one regarding progress. If a monk or a nun does not uproot these five defilements in the mind and does not unfasten these five shackles in the mind, then I say that monk or nun is certainly of a nature to regress. If [however], a monk or a nun has well uprooted the five defilements in the mind and has well unfastened the five shackles in the mind, then I say that monk or nun is of a nature to [become] pure. What are the five defilements in the mind that have been well uprooted? Suppose that someone is not doubtful about the World-honored One, not

hesitant, [and thus] opens the mind, releases the mind, and allows the mind to become quiet. If someone is not doubtful about the World-honored One, not hesitant, [and thus] opens the mind, releases the mind, and allows the mind to become quiet, then this is the first mental defilement that has been well uprooted, namely the one regarding the World-honored One. It is the same for [not being doubtful] about the Dharma... about the precepts... about the instructions... suppose that someone is [not doubt ful] about companions in the holy life who have been praised by the World honored One; he does not reprove them repeatedly, does not undervalue them, annoy them, or encroach on them, [and thus] he opens the mind, releases the mind, allows the mind to become quiet. This is the fifth mental defilement that has been well uprooted, namely the one regarding com panions in the holy life. What are the five shackles in the mind that have been unfastened? Sup pose that someone is separated from pollution regarding the body, separated from sensual desire, separated from craving, separated from thirst. If he is separated from pollution regarding the body, separated from sensual desire, separated from craving, separated from thirst, then his mind progresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind progresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice, then this is the first shackle in the mind that has been unfastened, namely the one regarding the body. Again, someone is separated from pollution regarding sensuality, separated from sensual desire, separated from craving, separated from thirst. If someone is separated from pollution regarding sensuality, separated from sensual desire, separated from craving, separated from thirst, then his mind pro gresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind progresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice, then this is the second shackle in the mind that has been unfastened, namely the one regarding sensuality. Again, [he heard when] someone [else] engages in talk that is noble and connected with benefit, gentle, and free from the hindrance of doubt, namely: talk about morality, talk about samādhi, talk about wisdom,

talk about liberation, talk about knowledge and vision of liberation, talk about lessening, talk about not socializing, talk about fewness of wants, talk about contentment, talk about abandoning, talk about dispassion, talk about cessation, talk about meditation practice, talk about dependent aris- ing—such talk [appropriate] for monks and renunciants. [Hearing it] his mind progresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind progresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice, then this is the third shackle in the mind that has been unfastened, namely the one regard- ing [receptiveness to appropriate] talk. Again, someone does not frequently talk with the common people and associate with them, is not disorderly, not haughty, and has learning. If some- one does not frequently talk with the common people and associate with them, is not disorderly, not haughty, and has learning, then his mind progresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind progresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and if he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice, then this is the fourth shackle in the mind that has been unfastened, namely the one regarding association. Again, he does not, because of having attained a little, settle for that, but seeks to progress further. If someone does not, because of having attained a little, settle for that but seeks to progress further, then his mind progresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice. If the mind progresses, becomes quiet, becomes still, becomes released, and if he [never] on his own impulse breaks off his meditation practice, then this is the fifth shackle in the mind that has been unfastened, namely the one regarding progress. If a monk or a nun has well uprooted these five defilements in the mind and has well unfastened these five shackles in the mind, then I say that this monk or nun has become pure by nature. Being established in these ten respects, they [should] cultivate five further states. What are the five? They should cultivate the basis for supernormal power that has samādhi of the mind and effort due to desire, based on separation, based on dispassion, based on cessation, based on abandoning,

inclining toward the uncreated. They should cultivate the basis for supernormal power that has samādhi of the mind and effort due to energy... [purity of] the mind... investigation, based on seclusion, based on dispassion, based on cessation, based on abandoning, inclining toward the uncreated. Tenacity is the fifth. One who has accomplished these fifteen states, including tenacity, has accomplished self-mastery and will certainly know, certainly see, certainly become fully awakened, and has arrived at the door to the deathless. He is close to nirvana. I say he will not fail to attain nirvana. It is just as a hen with ten or twelve eggs that she has sat on according to time, kept warm according to time, and watched over according to time to see if the chicks are emerging. Among those chicks one may, by itself, break through the shell with its beak and claws and be the first to emerge safely. In the same way, a monk who has accomplished these fifteen states, includ ing tenacity, has accomplished self-mastery and will certainly know, certainly see, certainly become fully awakened, certainly arrive at the door to the death less. He is close to nirvana. I say he will not fail to attain nirvana.^273 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma206-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[DA10]], [[EA51.4]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.1]], [[MA42]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA206]]
> ◄  [[ma205-bdk]] 📜  [[ma207-bdk]] ►
