---
sutta_code: "MA202"
sutta_title:
  - "大因 "
  - "Great Discourse on Causation"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA202]]
> ◄  [[ma201-bdk]] 📜  [[ma203-bdk]] ►

### 202. The Discourse on the Uposatha

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in the Eastern Park, in the Hall of Migāra’s Mother. At that time Visākhā, Migāra’s mother, having bathed in the morning and dressed in clean white clothes, gathered her sons, daughters-in-law, and other family dependents around her, and approached the Buddha. Having paid homage with her head, she stepped back and stood to one side. The World- honored One said, “Housewife, have you just taken a bath?” She replied, “World-honored One, today I am observing the _uposatha._ Well-gone One, today I am observing the _uposatha._ ” The World-honored One asked her: Housewife, what _uposatha_ are you observing today? There are three types of _uposatha._ What three? The first is the _uposatha_ of cowherds; the second is the _uposatha_ of the Nigaṇṭhas; the third is the noble eightfold _uposatha._ Housewife, what is the _uposatha_ of cowherds? It may be that in the morning a cowherd sets [his cows] free among the marshes and in the afternoon brings them back to the village. As he brings them back to the village, he thinks, “Today I set the cows free in this place; tomorrow I shall set the cows free in that place. Today I watered the cows in this place; tomorrow I shall water the cows in that place. Now my cows will spend the night in this place; tomorrow they will spend the night in that place.” Housewife, in the same way there are persons who, when observing the _uposatha,_ think, “Today I am eating this kind of food; tomorrow I shall eat that kind of food. Today I am drinking this kind of drink; tomorrow I shall drink that kind of drink. Today I am consuming this kind of food- stuff; tomorrow I shall consume that kind of foodstuff.” That person during this day and night is delighted by and attached to the fault of sensuality. This is what is meant by the _uposatha_ of cowherds. Observing the _uposatha_

of cowherds in this way, one does not get great benefit, does not gain great fruit. It is not of great merit, not widely pervasive. Housewife, what is the uposatha of the Nigaṇṭhas? It may be that some one who has gone forth as a Nigaṇṭha instructs persons, saying, “In the eastern direction beyond a hundred yojana s there are living beings, and in order to protect them you [must] renounce blade and cudgel. Likewise in the southern direction... the western direction... the northern direction beyond a hundred yojana s there are living beings, in order to protect them you [must] renounce blade and cudgel.” Thus he instructs and directs per sons. Either they are aware of living beings and protect them; or they are not aware of living beings and do not protect them.^210 [He also instructs them,] “On the fifteenth day, the time for reciting the code of rules, take off your clothes, stand naked facing east, and say this: “I am without father or mother; I have no father and mother. I am without wife and children; I have no wife and children. I am without male and female servants; I am not master over male and female servants.”^211 Housewife, instead of instructing them with truthful talk, he instructs them with empty, false words. Every day that person sees his father and mother and thinks, “These are my father and mother.” Every day his father and mother see their son and think, “This is our son.” He sees his wife and children and thinks, “This is my wife and children.” His wife and children see him and think, “This is my respected senior.” He sees his male and female servants and thinks, “These are my male and female servants.” The male and female servants see him and think, “This is our master.” As he employs them as he wishes, he is employing something that was not given to him. What he is employing is not something that was given to him. This is what is meant by the uposatha of the Nigaṇṭhas. Observing the uposatha of the Nigaṇṭhas in this way, one does not reap great benefit, does not gain great fruit. It is not of great merit, not widely pervasive. Housewife, what is it that is called the noble eightfold uposatha? When observing the uposatha a learned noble disciple reflects, “For their whole life ‘true persons’—that is, arahants—abstain from killing, having aban doned killing and renounced blade and cudgel.^212 They have shame and scruple and a mental [attitude] of loving-kindness and compassion, ben efiting all [beings, even] including insects. They have purified their minds

with regard to killing living beings. I too shall, for my whole life, abstain from killing, abandon killing and renounce blade and cudgel. I shall have shame and scruple and a mental [attitude] of loving-kindness and compassion, benefiting all [beings, even] including insects. I am now purifying my mind with regard to killing living beings. In this respect I am [becoming] equal to arahants, not different from them.” For this reason it is called _uposatha._ Again, housewife, when observing the _uposatha,_ a learned noble disciple reflects, “For their whole life ‘true persons’—that is, arahants—abstain from taking what is not given, having abandoned taking what is not given. They take [something only] after it has been given and delight in taking [only] what has been given. They are always fond of generosity. Their minds rejoice in giving, delighting in it without stinginess, not expecting any reward. They do not harbor an intention to steal. Able to restrain them- selves, they have purified their minds with regard to taking what is not given. I too shall, for my whole life, abstain from taking what is not given, and abandon taking what is not given. I shall take [something only] after it has been given and delight in taking [only] what has been given. I shall always be fond of generosity. My mind shall rejoice in giving, delighting in it without stinginess, not expecting any reward. I shall not harbor an intention to steal. Able to restrain myself, I am purifying my mind with regard to taking what is not given. In this respect I am [becoming] equal to arahants, not different from them.” For this reason it is called _uposatha._ Again, housewife, when observing the _uposatha_ the learned noble dis- ciple reflects, “For their whole life ‘true persons’—that is, arahants— abstain from sexual activity, having given up sexual activity. They cultivate celibacy with complete mental purity, practicing it without defilement, having abandoned sensuality, having given up sexual desires. They have purified their minds of sexual activity. I too shall, during this day and night, abstain from sexual activity, give up sexual activity. I shall cultivate celibacy with complete mental purity, practicing it without defilement, abandoning sensuality, giving up sexual desires. I am purifying the mind of sexual activity. In this respect I am [becoming] equal to arahants, not different from them.” For this reason it is called _uposatha._ Again, housewife, when observing the _uposatha_ the learned noble disciple reflects, “For their whole life ‘true persons’—that is, arahants—abstain

from false speech, having given up false speech. They speak the truth, delight in the truth, are established in the truth. They are trusted by persons and would not deceive [anyone in] the world. They have purified their minds with regard to false speech. I too shall, for my whole life, abstain from false speech, giving up false speech. I shall speak the truth, delight in the truth, being established in the truth. I will be trusted by persons and shall not deceive [anyone in] the world. I am purifying my mind with regard to false speech. In this respect I am [becoming] equal to arahants, not different from them.” For this reason it is called uposatha. Again, housewife, when observing the uposatha the learned noble dis ciple reflects, “For their whole life ‘true persons’—that is, arahants— abstain from the negligence of alcoholic beverages, having given up the negligence of alcoholic beverages. They have purified their minds with regard to the negligence of alcoholic beverages. I too shall, for my whole life, abstain from the negligence of alcoholic beverages, giving up the neg ligence of alcoholic beverages. I am purifying the mind with regard to the negligence of alcoholic beverages. In this respect I am [becoming] equal to arahants, not different from them.” For this reason it is called uposatha. Again, housewife, when observing the uposatha the learned noble disciple reflects, “For their whole life ‘true persons’—that is, arahants—abstain from [using] high or wide beds, having given up [using] high or wide beds. They delight in sitting or reclining low, whether on a bed or on a grass mat. They have purified their minds with regard to high or wide beds. During this day and night I [too] shall abstain from [using] high or wide beds, giving up [using] high or wide beds. I shall delight in sitting or reclining low, whether on a bed or on a grass mat. I am purifying my mind with regard to high or wide beds. In this respect I am [becoming] equal to arahants, not different from them.” For this reason it is called uposatha. Again, housewife, when observing the uposatha the learned noble dis ciple reflects, “For their whole life ‘true persons’—that is, arahants— abstain from [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics, as well as from singing, dancing, acting and from going to watch or listen to them, having given up [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics as well as singing, dancing, and acting, and going to watch or listen to them. They have purified their minds with regard to [using]

flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics, as well as singing, dancing, and acting and going to watch or listen to them. During this day and night I [too] shall abstain from [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics, as well as from singing, dancing, and acting and from going to watch or listen to them, giving up [using] flower gar- lands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics as well as singing, dancing, and acting and going to watch or listen to them. I am purifying my mind with regard to [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics, as well as singing, dancing, acting and going to watch or listen to them. In this respect I am [becoming] equal to arahants, not different from them.” For this reason it is called _uposatha._ Again, housewife, while observing the _uposatha_ the learned noble dis- ciple reflects, “For their whole life ‘true persons’—that is, arahants— abstain from eating at improper times, having given up eating at improper times. They eat [only] once, not eating at night, delighting in eating [only] at the proper time.^213 They have purified their minds with regard to eating at improper times. During this day and night I [too] shall abstain from eating at improper times, giving up eating at improper times. I shall eat [only] once, not eating at night, delighting in eating [only] at the proper time. I am purifying my mind with regard to eating at improper times. In this respect I am [becoming] equal to arahants, not different from them.” It is for this reason that it is called _uposatha._ in this noble eightfold _uposatha,_^214 one should further cultivate five things.^215 What are the five? Housewife, while observing the _uposatha_ the learned noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata [thus]: “That World-honored One, the Tathāgata, is free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, knower of the world, unsurpassable person, leader on the path of Dharma, teacher of _deva_ s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one.” When he recollects the Tathāgata in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, because of the Tathāgata the learned noble disciple’s mind gains serene delight, so that any evil inclination is made to cease and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease.

It is just as a person who has dirt on his head may, by washing it with paste, warm water, and human effort, make himself clean. In the same way, when observing the uposatha the learned noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata: “That World-honored One, the Tathāgata, is free from attachment, fully awakened, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable person, a leader on the path of Dharma, a teacher of deva s and human beings, called a buddha, an exalted one.” When he recollects the Tathāgata in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, because of the Tathāgata the learned noble disciple’s mind gains serene delight, so that any evil inclination is made to cease and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. This is called the learned noble disciple’s observance of a Brahmā uposatha, his communion with Brahmā—[that is, the Buddha].^216 Because of Brahmā, his mind attains serene delight, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Again, housewife, when observing the uposatha the learned noble dis ciple recollects the Dharma: “This Dharma is well taught by the World honored One; it is complete, constant, and unchanging, to be known with right knowledge, to be seen with right knowledge, to be realized with right knowledge.” When he recollects the Dharma in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, because of the Dharma the learned noble disciple’s mind gains serene delight, so that any evil inclination is made to cease and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. It is just as a person who has dirt and impurity on his body may, by means of bran, bathing powder, warm water, and human effort, wash him self thoroughly, so that his body becomes clean. In the same way, when observing the uposatha the learned noble disciple recollects the Dharma: “This Dharma is well taught by the World-honored One; it is complete, constant, and unchanging, to be known with right knowledge, to be seen with right knowledge, to be realized with right knowledge.”

When he recollects the Dharma in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, because of the Dharma the learned noble disciple’s mind gains serene delight, so that any evil inclination is made to cease and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, this is the learned noble disciple’s observing of a Dharma _uposatha,_ his communion with the Dharma. Because of the Dharma his mind attains serene delight, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Again, housewife, when observing the _uposatha_ the learned noble dis- ciple recollects the sangha: “The sangha of the World-honored One’s dis- ciples progresses well and uprightly; they practice what is essential and make progress in their practice. Among the sangha of the Tathāgata there truly are those who are progressing toward becoming ‘true persons,’ that is, arahants, and those who have realized arahantship; those who are pro- gressing toward nonreturn and those who have realized nonreturn; those who are progressing toward once-return and those who have realized once-return; those who are progressing toward stream-entry and those who have realized stream-entry—these being the four pairs of persons, the eight grades of noble beings. This is the sangha of the World-honored One’s disciples who are accomplished in virtue, samādhi, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and vision of liberation. They are worthy of being called upon, invited, supported, respected, and revered, being an excellent field of merit for _deva_ s and human beings.” When he recollects the sangha in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, because of the sangha the mind of the learned noble disciple gains serene delight, so that any evil inclination is made to cease and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. It is just as a person who has dirt and impurity on his clothes may, by means of ash and soap, washing powder, warm water, and human effort, wash them clean. In the same way, when observing the _uposatha_ the learned noble disciple recollects the sangha: “The sangha of the World- honored One’s disciples progresses well and uprightly; they practice what is essential and they make progress in their practice. Among the sangha

of the Tathāgata there truly are those who are progressing toward becoming ‘true persons,’ [that is,] arahants, and those who have realized arahantship; those who are progressing toward nonreturn and those who have realized nonreturn; those who are progressing toward once-return and those who have realized once-return; those who are progressing toward stream-entry and those who have realized stream-entry—these being the four pairs of persons, the eight grades of noble beings. This is the sangha of the World honored One’s disciples who are accomplished in virtue, samādhi, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and vision of liberation. They are wor thy of being called upon, invited, supported, respected, and revered, being an excellent field of merit for deva s and human beings.” When he recollects the sangha in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, because of the Sangha the mind of the learned noble disciple gains serene delight, so that any evil inclination is made to cease and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. This is the learned noble disciple’s observance of a sangha uposatha, his communion with the sangha. Because of the sangha his mind attains serene delight, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Again, housewife, when observing the uposatha the learned noble dis ciple recollects his own precepts: “[My precepts] are not deficient, not defective, not defiled, not corrupted, but are extensive and great, [under taken] without expectation of reward, and praised by the wise. I am well endowed with them and progressing well in them. I accept them well and uphold them well.” When he recollects his own precepts in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, because of the precepts the mind of the learned noble disciple gains serene delight, so that any evil inclination is made to cease and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. It is just as a mirror that has become dirty and no longer bright may, through being burnished with a polishing stone using human effort, become bright and clear. In the same way, when observing the uposatha the learned

noble disciple recollects his own precepts [thus]: “[My precepts] are not deficient, not defective, not defiled, not corrupted, but are extensive and great, [undertaken] without expectation of reward, and praised by the wise. I am well endowed with them and progressing well in them. I accept them well and uphold them well.” When he recollects his own precepts in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, because of the precepts the mind of the learned noble disciple gains serene delight, so that any evil inclination is made to cease and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. This is the learned noble disciple’s observance of a precepts _uposatha,_ his communion with the precepts. Because of the precepts his mind attains serene delight, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Again, housewife, when observing the _uposatha_ the learned noble disciple recollects the _deva_ s: “There really are the Four Heavenly Kings. Those _deva_ s were accomplished in faith, so that with the ending of their life here [in the human realm] they were reborn there. I also have such faith. Those _deva_ s were accomplished in virtue... learning... generosity... wisdom, so that with the ending of their life here they were reborn there. I also have such wisdom. There really are the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three... the Yāma _deva_ s... the Tusita _deva_ s... the _deva_ s who delight in creating... the _deva_ s who wield power over others’ creations. Those _deva_ s were accomplished in faith, so that with the ending of their life here they were reborn there. I too have such faith. Those _deva_ s were accomplished in virtue... learning... generosity... wisdom, so that with the ending of their life here they were reborn there. I too have such wisdom.” When he recollects the faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom of the _deva_ s in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. House- wife, because of the _deva_ s the mind of the learned noble disciple gains serene delight, so that any evil inclination is made to cease and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease.

It is just as gold that has become contaminated and impure may, by means of fire, tongs,^217 a hammer, red earth, and human effort, be rubbed and polished, so that it becomes bright and pure. In the same way, while observing the uposatha the learned noble disciple recollects the deva s [thus]: “There really are the Four Heavenly Kings. Those deva s were accomplished in faith, so that with the ending of their life here they were reborn there. I too have such faith. Those deva s were accomplished in virtue... learning... generosity... wisdom, so that with the ending of their life here they were reborn there. I too have such wisdom. There really are the deva s of the Thirty-three... the Yāma deva s... the Tusita deva s... the deva s who delight in creating... the deva s who wield power over others’ creations. Those deva s were accomplished in faith, so that with the ending of their life here they were reborn there. I too have such faith. Those deva s were accomplished in virtue... learning... generosity... wisdom, so that with the ending of their life here they were reborn there. I also have such wisdom.” When he recollects the faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom of the deva s in this way, any evil inclination is made to cease, and any defiled, evil, and unwholesome mental state is also made to cease. Housewife, suppose that one observes in this way this noble eightfold uposatha. Now, there are the sixteen great countries, namely (1) Aṅga, (2) Magadha, (3) Kāsi, (4) Kosala, (5) Kuru, (6) Pañcāla, (7) Assaka, (8) Avantī, (9) Ceti, (10) Vajji, (11) Vaṃsa, (12) Malla, (13) Soma, (14) Sūrasena, (15) Yona,^218 and (16) Kamboja. In these countries whatever there is of money and treasures—gold, silver, maṇi- jewel, pearl, beryl, rǎnggā,^219 green jade, coral, liúshào, bǐngliú, bǐnglēi, agate, tortoise shell, ruby, white jade, and pearl shell—a person, on being established there as king, could make use of these as he wished. Yet, monks, all of that is not worth the sixteenth part of keeping the noble eightfold uposatha.^220 For this reason, housewife, I declare that being a king among human beings cannot compare with the pleasures of the deva s. For example, fifty years among human beings are one day and night among the Four Heav enly Kings. Thirty such days and nights are one month, and twelve such months are one year. Five hundred such years is the life span of the Four Heavenly Kings. Housewife, it is entirely possible that a clansman or a

clanswoman who has observed the noble eightfold _uposatha_ will, on the breaking up of the body with the ending of life, be reborn among the Four Heavenly Kings. For this reason, housewife, I declare that being a king among human beings cannot compare with the pleasures of the _deva_ s. For example, a hundred years among human beings are one day and night among the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three. Thirty such days and nights are one month, and twelve such months are one year. A thousand such years is the life span of the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three. Housewife, it is entirely possible that a clansman or a clanswoman who has observed the noble eightfold _uposatha_ will, on the breaking up of the body with the ending of life, be reborn among the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three. For this reason, housewife, I declare that being a king among human beings cannot compare with the pleasures of the _deva_ s. For example, two hundred years among human beings are one day and night among the Yāma _deva_ s. Thirty such days and nights are one month, and twelve such months are one year. Two thousand such years is the life span of the Yāma _deva_ s. Housewife, it is entirely possible that a clansman or a clanswoman who has observed the noble eightfold _uposatha_ will, on the breaking up of the body with the ending of life, be reborn among the Yāma _deva_ s. For this reason, housewife, I declare that being a king among human beings cannot compare with the pleasures of the _deva_ s. For example, four hundred years among human beings are one day and night among the Tusita _deva_ s. Thirty such days and nights are one month, and twelve such months are one year. Four thousand such years is the life span of the Tusita _deva_ s. Housewife, it is entirely possible that a clansman or a clanswoman who has observed the noble eightfold _uposatha_ will, on the breaking up of the body with the ending of life, be reborn among the Tusita _deva_ s. For this reason, housewife, I declare that being a king among human beings cannot compare with the pleasures of the _deva_ s. For example, eight hundred years among human beings are one day and night among the _deva_ s who delight in creating. Thirty such days and nights are one month, and twelve such months are one year. Eight thousand such years is the life span of the _deva_ s who delight in creating. Housewife, it is entirely possible that a clansman or a clanswoman who has observed the noble

eightfold uposatha will, on the breaking up of the body with the ending of life, be reborn among the deva s who delight in creating. For this reason, housewife, I declare that being a king among human beings cannot compare with the pleasures of the deva s. For example, one thousand six hundred years among human beings are one day and night among the deva s who wield power over others’ creations. Thirty such day and nights are one month, and twelve such months are one year. Sixteen thousand such years is the life span of the deva s who wield power over others’ creations. Housewife, it is entirely possible that a clansman or a clanswoman who has observed the noble eightfold uposatha will, on the breaking up of the body with the ending of life, be reborn among the deva s who wield power over others’ creations.^221 Then Visākhā, Migāra’s mother extended her hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said: World-honored One, the noble eightfold uposatha is most wonderful, most remarkable, of great profit, of great fruit, of great virtue, of great scope. World-honored One, from now on for my whole life I will observe the noble eightfold uposatha, according to my strength, giving generously and cultivating merit. Then Visākhā, Migāra’s mother, having heard what the Buddha said, bore it well [in mind], paid homage with her head at the Buddha’s feet, circum ambulated him three times, and left. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Visākhā, Migāra’s mother, and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma202-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA24.6]], [[SA861-863]] |  |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.46]], [[AN3.70]], [[AN8.43]], [[UD2.10]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA202]]
> ◄  [[ma201-bdk]] 📜  [[ma203-bdk]] ►
