---
sutta_code: "MA203"
sutta_title:
  - "晡利多 "
  - "With Potaliya"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA203]]
> ◄  [[ma202-bdk]] 📜  [[ma204-bdk]] ►

### 203. The Discourse to Potaliya

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Nālanda, in Pāvārika’s Mango Grove. At that time the householder Potaliya, wearing clean white clothes and a white headcloth, grasping a staff and holding a parasol, and wearing layman’s sandals, was going from park to park, from pleasure garden to pleasure garden, from grove to grove, wandering at his pleasure. Whenever he saw renunciants or brahmins, he would say, “Venerable friends, you should know

that I abstain from worldliness. I have abandoned worldliness. I have relin- quished all worldly affairs.” The renunciants and brahmins would reply with soft and gentle words, “Indeed, the venerable friend Potaliya abstains from worldliness. He has abandoned worldliness. He has relinquished all worldly affairs.”^223 Then, as he was wandering around, the householder Potaliya approached the Buddha. He exchanged polite greetings while standing before the Buddha, grasping his staff. The World-honored One said, “Householder, there are seats. Be seated if you like.” The householder Potaliya said: Gotama, this is not right; this is not proper. Why is that? I abstain from worldliness. I have abandoned worldliness. I have relinquished all worldly affairs. How is it that the renunciant Gotama addresses me as “house- holder”? The World-honored One replied, “You have the [outer] signs and marks of a householder, therefore I address you, saying, ‘Householder, there are seats. Be seated if you like.’” Three times the World-honored One said, “Householder, there are seats. Be seated if you like.” Three times the householder Potaliya said: Gotama, this is not right; this is not proper. I abstain from worldliness. I have abandoned worldliness. I have relinquished all worldly affairs. How is it that the renunciant Gotama addresses me as “householder”? [And each time] the World-honored One replied, “You have the [outer] signs and marks of a householder, therefore I address you saying, ‘House- holder, there are seats. Be seated if you like.’” The World-honored One asked him, “How do you abstain from worldli- ness? How have you abandoned worldliness and relinquished all worldly affairs?” The householder Potaliya replied: Gotama, all of the wealth in my house I have given in its entirety to my sons. I wander without occupation and without ambition. I seek only food

to sustain my life. This is how I abstain from worldliness. This is how I have abandoned worldliness and relinquished all worldly affairs. The World-honored One said: Householder, in this noble Dharma and discipline it is not in this way that one abandons and cuts off worldly affairs. Householder, in this noble Dharma and discipline there are eight aspects to abandoning worldly affairs. At this the householder Potaliya set aside his staff, put away his parasol, and took off his layman’s sandals. Extending his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, he said, “Gotama, what are the eight aspects to abandoning worldly affairs in this noble Dharma and discipline?” The World-honored One replied: Householder, with the support of abstention from killing, a learned noble disciple abandons killing. With the support of abstention from taking what is not given, he abandons taking what is not given. With the support of abstention from sexual misconduct, he abandons sexual misconduct.^224 With the support of abstention from false speech, he abandons false speech. With the support of absence of desire and attachment, he abandons desire and attachment. With the support of absence of harmfulness and hatred, he abandons harmfulness and hatred. With the support of absence of dislike and irritation, he abandons dislike and irritation. With the support of absence of excessive pride, he abandons excessive pride. Householder, how does a learned noble disciple, with the support of abstention from killing, abandon killing? A learned noble disciple reflects thus: “One who kills will certainly experience bad results in this life and in future lives. If I were to be one who kills, I would harm myself and be spoken ill of by others, by deva s and all wise practitioners of the holy life, who would talk about my conduct and my bad reputation would be heard of in all directions. With the breaking up of the body at the ending of life I would certainly go to a bad destiny, being reborn in hell. In such ways one who kills experiences these bad results in this life and in future lives. With the support of abstention from killing, should I not better abandon killing?”

So, with the support of abstention from killing, he abandons killing. In this way, with the support of abstention from killing, the learned noble disciple abandons killing. Householder, how does a learned noble disciple, with the support of abstention from taking what is not given, abandon taking what is not given? A learned noble disciple reflects thus: “One who takes what is not given will certainly experience bad results in this life and in future lives. If I were to be one who takes what is not given, I would harm myself and be spoken ill of by others. _Deva_ s and all wise practitioners of the holy life would talk about my conduct and my bad reputation would be heard of in all directions. With the breaking up of the body at the ending of life I would certainly go to a bad destiny, being reborn in hell. In such ways one who takes what is not given experiences these bad results in this life and in future lives. With the support of abstention from taking what is not given, should I not better abandon taking what is not given?” So, with the support of abstention from taking what is not given, he abandons taking what is not given. In this way, with the support of absten- tion from taking what is not given, the learned noble disciple abandons taking what is not given. Householder, how does a learned noble disciple, with the support of abstention from sexual misconduct, abandon sexual misconduct? A learned noble disciple reflects thus: “One who [engages in] sexual misconduct will certainly experience bad results in this life and in future lives. If I were to be one who engages in sexual misconduct, I would harm myself and be spoken ill of by others, by _deva_ s and all wise practitioners of the holy life, who would talk about my conduct and my bad reputation would be heard of in all directions. With the breaking up of the body at the ending of life I would certainly go to a bad destiny, being reborn in hell. In such ways one who engages in sexual misconduct experiences these bad results in this life and in future lives. With the support of abstention from sexual misconduct, should I not better abandon sexual misconduct?” So, with the support of abstention from sexual misconduct, he abandons sexual misconduct. In this way, with the support of abstention from sexual misconduct, the learned noble disciple abandons sexual misconduct.

Householder, how does a learned noble disciple, with the support of abstention from false speech, abandon false speech? A learned noble dis ciple reflects thus: “One who engages in false speech will certainly expe rience bad results in this life and in future lives. If I were to be one who engages in false speech, I would harm myself and be spoken ill of by others, by deva s and all wise practitioners of the holy life, who would talk about my conduct, and my bad reputation would be heard of in all directions. With the breaking up of the body at the ending of life I would certainly go to a bad destiny, being reborn in hell. In such ways one who engages in false speech experiences these bad results in this life and in future lives. With the support of abstention from false speech, should I not better abandon false speech?” So, with the support of abstention from false speech, he abandons false speech. In this way, with the support of abstention from false speech, the learned noble disciple abandons false speech. Householder, how does a learned noble disciple, with the support of absence of desire and attachment, abandon desire and attachment? A learned noble disciple reflects thus: “One who has desire and attachment will certainly experience bad results in this life and in future lives. If I were to be one who has desire and attachment, I would harm myself and be spoken ill of by others, by deva s and all wise practitioners of the holy life, who would talk about my conduct and my bad reputation would be heard of in all directions. With the breaking up of the body at the ending of life I would certainly go to a bad destiny, being reborn in hell. In such ways one who has desire and attachment experiences these bad results in this life and in future lives. With the support of absence of desire and attachment, should I not better abandon desire and attachment?” So, with the support of absence of desire and attachment, he abandons desire and attachment. In this way, with the support of absence of desire and attachment, the learned noble disciple abandons desire and attachment. Householder, how does a learned noble disciple, with the support of absence of harmfulness and hatred, abandon harmfulness and hatred? A learned noble disciple reflects thus: “One who harbors harmfulness and hatred will certainly experience bad results in this life and in future lives. If I were to be one who harbors harmfulness and hatred, I would harm

myself and be spoken ill of by others, by _deva_ s and all wise practitioners of the holy life, who would talk about my conduct and my bad reputation would be heard of in all directions. With the breaking up of the body at the ending of life I would certainly go to a bad destiny, being reborn in hell. In such ways one who harbors harmfulness and hatred experiences these bad results in this life and in future lives. With the support of absence of harm- fulness and hatred, should I not better abandon harmfulness and hatred?” So, with the support of absence of harmfulness and hatred, he abandons harmfulness and hatred. In this way, with the support of absence of harm- fulness and hatred, the learned noble disciple abandons harmfulness and hatred. Householder, how does a learned noble disciple, with the support of absence of dislike and irritation, abandon dislike and irritation? A learned noble disciple reflects thus: “One who harbors dislike and irritation will certainly experience bad results in this life and in future lives. If I were to be one who harbors dislike and irritation, I would harm myself and be spoken ill of by others, by _deva_ s and all wise practitioners of the holy life, who would talk about my conduct and my bad reputation would be heard of in all directions. With the breaking up of the body at the ending of life I would certainly go to a bad destiny, being reborn in hell. In such ways one who harbors dislike and irritation experiences these bad results in this life and in future lives. With the support of absence of dislike and irritation, should I not better abandon dislike and irritation?” So, with the support of absence of dislike and irritation, he abandons dislike and irritation. In this way, with the support of absence of dislike and irritation, the learned noble disciple abandons dislike and irritation. Householder, how does a learned noble disciple, with the support of absence of excessive pride, abandon excessive pride? A learned noble dis- ciple reflects thus: “One who has excessive pride will certainly experience bad results in this life and in future lives. If I were to be one who has exces- sive pride, I would harm myself and be spoken ill of by others, by _deva_ s and all wise practitioners of the holy life, who would talk about my conduct and my bad reputation would be heard of in all directions. With the breaking up of the body at the ending of life I would certainly go to a bad destiny, being reborn in hell. In such ways one who has excessive pride experiences

these bad results in this life and in future lives. Being with the support of absence of excessive pride, should I not better abandon excessive pride?” So, with the support of absence of excessive pride, he abandons exces- sive pride. In this way, with the support of absence of excessive pride, the learned noble disciple abandons excessive pride. These are the eight aspects to the complete abandoning of worldly affairs in this noble Dharma and discipline. The householder asked, “Gotama, in this noble Dharma and discipline is just this the [complete] abandoning of worldly affairs or is there still more?” The World-honored One replied: In this noble Dharma and discipline only this is not the complete aban- doning of worldly affairs. There are a further eight aspects to realizing the complete abandoning and cutting off of worldly affairs.^225 On hearing this, the householder Potaliya took off his white headcloth, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, “Gotama, what are the further eight aspects to realizing the [complete] abandoning of worldly affairs in this noble Dharma and discipline?” The World-honored One replied: Householder, suppose that a dog, being hungry, emaciated from hunger, goes to the place of a cow butcher. The cow butcher or his apprentice throws the dog a bone that has been cut clean of meat. Having got the bone, the dog chews at it all over, even until it harms his lips, damages his teeth, or injures his throat, yet that dog does not get to satisfy his hunger. Householder, the learned noble disciple similarly reflects, “Sensual pleasures are like bare bones; the World-honored One has declared that sensual pleasures are like bare bones, with little enjoyment and much suf- fering. There is much danger in them, so one should keep away from them.” If one gives up sensual pleasures and relinquishes evil and unwholesome states, then [concern about] all of these so-called worldly nutriments will [in time] come to permanent cessation without remainder. One should cultivate that. Householder, suppose that a small piece of meat has fallen on open ground not far from a village; and that a crow or an owl carries off this

meat, and other crows, owls, and birds pursue it, competing [for the meat]. What do you think, householder, if that crow or owl does not quickly let go of this small piece of meat, will the other crows and owls competing [for the meat continue to] pursue it?^226 The householder replied, “Yes, indeed, Gotama.” [The Buddha said:] Householder, what do you think, if that crow or owl is able to let go quickly of that small piece of meat, will the other crows, owls, and birds competing [for the meat] continue to pursue it? The householder replied, “No, Gotama.” [The Buddha said:] Householder, the learned noble disciple similarly reflects, “Sensual pleasures are like a piece of meat; the World-honored One has declared that sensual pleasures are like a piece of meat, with little enjoyment and much suffering. There is much danger in them, so one should keep away from them.” If one gives up sensual pleasures and relinquishes evil and unwholesome states, then [concern about] all of these so-called worldly nutriments will [in time] come to permanent cessation without remainder. One should cultivate that. Householder, suppose that a man who is holding a burning torch in his hand is walking against the wind. What do you think, householder, if that man does not quickly drop the torch, will his hand or some other part of his body get burned? The householder replied, “Yes, indeed, Gotama.” [The Buddha said,] “What do you think, householder, if that man quickly drops the torch, will his hand or some other part of his body get burned?”^227 The householder replied, “No, Gotama.” [The Buddha said:] Householder, the learned noble disciple similarly reflects, “Sensual pleasures are like a burning torch; the World-honored One has declared that sensual pleasures are like a burning torch, with little enjoyment and much suffering. There is much danger in them, so one should keep away from them.”

If one gives up sensual pleasures and relinquishes evil and unwholesome states, then [concern about] all of these so-called worldly nutriments will [in time] come to permanent cessation without remainder. One should cultivate that. Householder, suppose that, not far from a village, there is a great burning [charcoal] pit, full of fire but without smoke. A man comes by who is not foolish or stupid, not deranged, who is in his right mind, free and uncon strained; who is fond of pleasure and not fond of pain, who abhors pain; who is fond of living and not fond of death, who abhors death. What do you think, householder, would that man enter that burning [charcoal] pit?^228 The householder replied: No, Gotama. Why is that? Seeing the burning [charcoal] pit, he would reflect, “If I fall into this burning [charcoal] pit, I will certainly die, without a doubt; and should I not die, I will surely experience extreme pain.” Seeing the burning [charcoal] pit, he would have the intention of keeping far from it and will wish to get away from it. [The Buddha said:] Householder, the learned noble disciple similarly reflects, “Sensual pleas ures are like a burning [charcoal] pit; the World-honored One has declared sensual pleasures to be like a burning [charcoal] pit, with little enjoyment and much suffering. There is much danger in them, so one should keep away from them.” If one gives up sensual pleasures and relinquishes evil and unwholesome states, then [concern about] all of these so-called worldly nutriments will [in time] come to permanent cessation without remainder. One should cultivate that. Householder, suppose that, not far from a village, there is a great poi sonous snake, very vicious and exceedingly poisonous, black in color and terrifying.^229 A man comes by who is not foolish or stupid, not deranged, who is in his right mind, free and unconstrained; who is fond of pleasure and not fond of pain, who abhors pain; who is fond of living and not fond of death, who abhors death. What do you think, householder, will that

man reach out his hand or some other part of his body, and speak like this [to the snake]: “Bite me, bite me!”?

The householder replied:

No, Gotama. Why is that? Seeing the poisonous snake, he will reflect, “If my hand or some other part of my body is bitten by this snake, I will cer- tainly die, without a doubt; and should I not die, I will surely experience extreme pain.” Seeing the poisonous snake, he will have the intention of keeping far from it and will wish to get away from it.

[The Buddha said:]

Householder, the learned noble disciple similarly reflects, “Sensual pleas- ures are like a poisonous snake; the World-honored One has declared that sensual pleasures are like a poisonous snake, with little enjoyment and much suffering. There is much danger in them, so one should keep away from them.” If one gives up sensual pleasures and relinquishes evil and unwholesome states, then [concern about] all of these so-called worldly nutriments will [in time] come to permanent cessation without remainder. One should cultivate that. Householder, suppose that a person has a dream in which he is fully provided with the five strands of sensual pleasure and is amusing himself with them.^230 On waking, he sees none of it. Householder, the learned noble disciple similarly reflects, “Sensual pleasures are like a dream; the World-honored One has declared that sensual pleasures are like a dream, with little enjoyment and much suffering. There is much danger in them, so one should keep away from them.” If one gives up sensual pleasures and relinquishes evil and unwholesome states, then [concern about] all of these so-called worldly nutriments will [in time] come to permanent cessation without remainder. One should cultivate that. Householder, suppose that a man borrows goods for his pleasure, such as a palace with towers, a pleasure garden with bathing pools, a chariot drawn by an elephant or a horse, silk coverlets, rings, bracelets, perfume,

necklaces, golden ornaments, decorative hair-pins, or elegant clothes. On seeing him, many persons exclaim to one another, “How good to be like this! How happy to be like this! Those who have wealth should amuse themselves to the utmost like this!” [Later, however], the owner of those goods wants to take them back or get someone else to take them back. So he takes them back himself or gets someone else to take them back [for him]. Many persons see this and say to one another, “He is a borrower and actually a deceiver. How bad is this borrower!” Why is that? The owner of those goods wanted to take them back or to get someone else to take them back. So he took them back himself or got someone else to take them back. Householder, the learned noble disciple similarly reflects, “Sensual pleasures are like borrowed [goods]; the World-honored One has declared that sensual pleasures are like borrowed [goods], with little enjoyment and much suffering. There is much danger in them, so one should keep away from them.” If one gives up sensual pleasures and relinquishes evil and unwholesome states, then [concern about] all of these so-called worldly nutriments will [in time] come to permanent cessation without remainder. One should cultivate that. Householder, suppose that, not far from a village, there is a great fruit tree and on this tree there are always many fine and appetizing fruits. A man comes by who, being hungry, emaciated from hunger, wants to get to eat the fruits. He thinks, “On this tree there are always many fine and appetizing fruits. I am emaciated from hunger and want to get the fruits to eat. However, there are no fallen fruits beneath the tree that I could eat my fill of and take home with me. I could climb this tree. Should I go up it now?” Thinking this, he goes up [the tree]. [Just then] another man comes by who, being hungry, emaciated from hunger, wants to get to eat the fruits. He is carrying a very sharp ax, and he thinks, “In this tree there are always many fine and appetizing fruits. However, there are no fallen fruits beneath the tree that I could eat my fill of and take home with me. I cannot climb this tree. Should I now chop it down?” Then he promptly [begins] chopping the tree.

What do you think, householder, if the man who is up in the tree does not come down quickly then when the tree topples to the ground, will he certainly break an arm or some other part of his body?

The householder replied, “Yes, indeed, Gotama.” [The Buddha said:]

Householder, what do you think, if that man up in the tree comes down quickly, then when the tree topples to the ground, will he break an arm or some other part of his body?^231

The householder replied, “No, Gotama.” [The Buddha said:]

Householder, the learned noble disciple similarly reflects, “Sensual pleas- ures are like fruits on a tree; the World-honored One has declared that sensual pleasures are like fruits on a tree, with little enjoyment and much suffering. There is much danger in them, so one should keep away from them.” If one gives up sensual pleasures and relinquishes evil and unwhole- some states, then [concern about] all of these so-called worldly nutriments will [in time] come to permanent cessation without remainder. One should cultivate that. These are the eight further aspects in this noble Dharma and discipline for realizing the complete abandoning of worldly affairs. Householder,^232 with the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, he dwells having attained the second absorption, which is without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation and with rapture and pleasure born of concen- tration. Secluded from rapture and pleasure, dwelling with equanimity and without seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right compre- hension, experiencing happiness with the body, he dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mindfulness, a happy abode. With the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of rapture and displeasure, with neither pain nor pleasure, and with purity of mindfulness and equa- nimity, he dwells having attained the fourth absorption.^233

With his mind collected and purified in this way, free of defilements, free of troubles, malleable, well steadied, having gained mental imper turbability, he cultivates realization of the knowledge of the destruction of the taints.^234 He knows as it really is: “This is dukkha. ” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of dukkha. ” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of dukkha. ” He knows as it really is: “This is the path to the ces sation of dukkha. ” He knows as it really is: “These are the taints.” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of the taints.” He knows [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of the taints.” He knows as it really is: “This is the path to the cessation of the taints.” Knowing like this, seeing like this, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire... from the taint of existence, his mind is liberated from the taint of ignorance. It being liberated, he knows it is liberated, knowing as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” As this teaching was being taught, there arose in the householder Potaliya the spotless, immaculate Dharma eye in regard to all phenomena.^235 Then the householder Potaliya saw the Dharma, attained the Dharma, realized the bright pure Dharma; he abandoned doubt and went beyond perplexity; he became independent of other teachers; he would never again follow others; and he became free of hesitation. Having been established in the attainment of the fruit, he had attained fearlessness in the Dharma taught by the World honored One. He paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet and said: World-honored One, from now on I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth until the end of life, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life. World-honored One, formerly, wearing clean white clothes and a white headcloth, grasping a staff and holding a parasol, and wearing layman’s sandals, I went from park to park, from pleasure garden to pleasure garden, from grove to grove, wandering at my pleasure. Whenever I saw renunciants

or brahmins, I would say, “Venerable friends, I abstain from worldliness. I have abandoned worldliness. I have relinquished all worldly affairs.” The renunciants and brahmins would tell me with soft and gentle words, “Indeed, the venerable friend Potaliya abstains from worldliness. He has abandoned worldliness. He has relinquished all worldly affairs.” World-honored One, at that time I was giving those who actually have no knowledge the status of having knowledge. I was revering as knowl- edgeable wise persons those who actually are not a shrine for knowledge, are not nourished by knowledge, and actually are without knowledge. World-honored One, from now on I give the sangha of monks, disciples of the World-honored One who do actually have knowledge, the status of persons of knowledge and wisdom. They actually are a shrine for knowl- edge and are nourished by knowledge. They actually do have knowledge and I shall revere them as knowledgeable wise persons.^236 World-honored One, I now again go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life, until death. World-honored One, the faith and reverence I earlier had for heterodox renunciants and brahmins, this has now been cut off. World-honored One, a third time I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha of monks. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay disciple from this day forth until the end of life, as having personally gone for refuge for my whole life. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the house- holder Potaliya and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma203-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN12.4-9]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN137]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA203]]
> ◄  [[ma202-bdk]] 📜  [[ma204-bdk]] ►
