---
sutta_code: "MA205"
sutta_title:
  - "五下分結 "
  - "Five Lower Fetters"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA205]]
> ◄  [[ma204-bdk]] 📜  [[ma206-bdk]] ►

### 205. The Discourse on the Five Lower Fetters

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One said to the monks, “I once taught you about the five lower fetters. Do you remember that?” The monks were silent and did not reply. A second and a third time the World-honored One said to the monks, “I once taught you about the five lower fetters. Do you remember that?” And a second and a third time the monks were silent and did not reply.^262 At that time the venerable Māluṅkyaputta was among that assembly. Then the venerable Māluṅkyaputta rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, “I remember the World-honored One having once taught about the five lower fetters.” The World-honored One asked, “Māluṅkyaputta, [how] do you remember my having once taught about the five lower fetters?” The venerable Māluṅkyaputta replied: I remember the World-honored One once teaching that the first lower fetter is sensual desire... [the second lower fetter is] hatred... [the third lower fetter is] identity view... [the fourth lower fetter is] clinging to precepts... I remember the World-honored One [once] teaching that the fifth lower fetter is doubt. The World-honored One rebuked him, saying: Māluṅkyaputta, how did you memorize my teaching about the five lower fetters? Māluṅkyaputta, from whose mouth did you [hear and then] mem- orize my teaching about the five lower fetters? Māluṅkyaputta, will not many heterodox practitioners come and censure you, using the simile of the infant boy? Māluṅkyaputta, a young tender infant sleeping on their back has no notion of sensual desire; how could their mind be entangled in sensual desire? Yet, because of their disposition

to an underlying tendency, one speaks of their underlying tendency to sensual desire. Māluṅkyaputta, a young tender infant sleeping on their back has no notion of a living being; how could their mind be entangled in hatred? Yet, because of their disposition to an underlying tendency, one speaks of their underlying tendency to hatred. Māluṅkyaputta, a young tender infant sleeping on their back has no notion of identity; how could their mind be entangled in identity view? Yet, because of their disposition to an underlying tendency, one speaks of their underlying tendency to identity view. Māluṅkyaputta, a young tender infant sleeping on their back has no notion of precepts; how could their mind be entangled in clinging to pre cepts? Yet, because of their disposition to an underlying tendency, one speaks of their underlying tendency to cling to precepts. Māluṅkyaputta, a young tender infant sleeping on their back has no notion of Dharma; how could their mind be entangled in doubt? Yet, because of their disposition to an underlying tendency, one speaks of their underlying tendency to doubt. Māluṅkyaputta, will not many heterodox practitioners come and censure you, using the simile of the infant? Then the venerable Māluṅkyaputta, having been rebuked to his face by the World-honored One, was sad and distressed. He lowered his head in silence, unable to reply, as if immersed in thought. At that time, having rebuked Māluṅkyaputta to his face, the World-honored One remained silent. At that time the venerable Ānanda was standing behind the World-honored One holding a fan to fan him. Then the venerable Ānanda extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said: World-honored One, now is the right time, Well-gone One, now is the right time for the World-honored One to teach the five lower fetters to the monks. Having heard it from the World-honored One, the monks will receive it and remember it well. The World-honored One said, “Ānanda, listen closely and pay proper attention.”

The venerable Ānanda said, “Certainly, we shall listen and receive the teaching.” The Buddha said: Ānanda, suppose that someone is entangled in sensual desires. Sensual desire having arisen in his mind, he does not really know how to abandon it. In him, not really knowing how to abandon it, sensual desire evolves and flourishes out of control and he cannot get rid of it. This is a lower fetter. Ānanda, suppose that someone is entangled in hatred. Hatred having arisen in his mind, he does not really know how to abandon it. In him, not really knowing how to abandon it, hatred evolves and flourishes out of control and he cannot get rid of it. This is a lower fetter. Ānanda, suppose that someone is entangled in identity view. Identity view having arisen in his mind, he does not really know how to abandon it. In him, not really knowing how to abandon it, identity view evolves and flourishes out of control and he cannot get rid of it. This is a lower fetter. Ānanda, suppose that someone is entangled in clinging to precepts. Clinging to precepts having arisen in his mind, he does not really know how to abandon it. In him, not really knowing how to abandon it, clinging to precepts evolves and flourishes out of control and he cannot get rid of it. This is a lower fetter. Ānanda, suppose that someone is entangled in doubt. Doubt having arisen in his mind, he does not really know how to abandon it. In him, not really knowing how to abandon it, doubt evolves and flourishes out of control and he cannot get rid of it. This is a lower fetter. Ānanda, it is by relying on a path, relying on a way, that the five lower fetters are eradicated. That someone might, without relying on this path, without relying on this way, eradicate the five lower fetters—that is cer- tainly not possible. Ānanda, he is just like a man who wishes to get heartwood and is seeking it. Because he is seeking heartwood, he takes an ax and goes into the forest. This man sees a tree complete with roots, trunk, branches, leaves, and heart- wood. That this man might, without cutting the roots and trunk, get heartwood to take home with him—that is certainly not possible. In the same way, Ānanda, it is by relying on a path, relying on a way, that the five lower fetters are eradicated. That one might, without relying

on this path, without relying on this way, eradicate the five lower fetters— that is certainly not possible. Ānanda, it is by relying on a path, relying on a way, that the five lower fetters are eradicated. That someone might, by relying on this path, relying on this way, eradicate the five lower fetters—that is certainly possible. Ānanda, he is just like a man who wishes to get heartwood and is seek ing it. Because he is seeking heartwood, he takes an ax and goes into the forest. This man sees a tree complete with roots, trunk, branches, leaves, and heartwood. That this man might, by cutting the roots and trunk, get heartwood to take home with him—that is certainly possible. In the same way, Ānanda, it is by relying on a path, relying on a way, that the five lower fetters are eradicated. That one might, by relying on this path, relying on this way, eradicate the five lower fetters—that is cer tainly possible. Ānanda, by relying on what path, by relying on what way, are the five lower fetters eradicated?^263 Ānanda, suppose that someone is not entangled in sensual desires, and that when the entanglement of sensual desire arises [in his mind], he really knows how to abandon it. Really knowing how to abandon it, he ceases to be entangled in sensual desire. Ānanda, suppose that someone is not entangled in hatred, and that when the entanglement of hatred arises [in his mind], he really knows how to abandon it. Really knowing how to abandon it, he ceases to be entangled in hatred. Ānanda, suppose that someone is not entangled in identity view, and that when the entanglement of identity view arises [in his mind], he really knows how to abandon it. Really knowing how to abandon it, he ceases to be entangled in identity view. Ānanda, suppose that someone is not entangled in clinging to precepts, and that when the entanglement of clinging to precepts arises [in his mind], he really knows how to abandon it. Really knowing how to abandon it, he ceases to be entangled in clinging to precepts. Ānanda, suppose that someone is not entangled in doubt, and that when the entanglement of doubt arises [in his mind], he really knows how to aban don it. Really knowing how to abandon it, he ceases to be entangled in doubt.

Ānanda, by relying on this path, by relying on this way, the five lower fetters are eradicated. Ānanda, suppose that the river Ganges is full, with the water right up to its banks, and that a man, wanting to [attend to] some matter on the farther bank, wishes to cross over the river. He thinks, “This river Ganges is full, with the water right up to its banks. I have some matter [to attend to] on the farther bank and wish to cross over; [but] my body lacks the strength that would enable me to swim safely to that farther bank.” Ānanda, one should know that man as lacking strength. In the same way, Ānanda, if a person’s mind is not directed toward awakening, cessation, and nirvana, not confident about it, not established in it, not committed to it, [then], Ānanda, one should know this person to be like that feeble man, lacking strength. Ānanda, suppose that the river Ganges is full, with the water right up to its banks and that a man, wanting to [attend to] some matter on the farther bank, wishes to cross over the river. He thinks, “This river Ganges is full, with the water right up to its banks. I have some matter [to attend to] on the farther bank and wish to cross over; and my body now has the strength that would enable me to swim safely to that farther bank.” Ānanda, one should know that man as having strength. In the same way, Ānanda, if a person’s mind is directed toward awak- ening, cessation, and nirvana, confident about it, established in it, committed to it, [then], Ānanda, one should know this person to be like that man who has strength. Ānanda, suppose a mountain stream that is very deep and very broad, with a quick-flowing and powerful current sweeping much flotsam along, and with neither ferry nor bridge; and suppose that a man comes along who has some matter [to attend to] on the farther bank and is seeking a way to cross over.^264 As he is seeking a way to cross over, he thinks, “Now, this mountain stream is very deep and very broad, with a quick-flowing and powerful current sweeping much flotsam along, and with neither ferry nor bridge by which one could cross it. I have some matter [to attend to] on the farther bank and want to cross over. By what means can I safely reach that farther bank?”

He further thinks, “Let me now collect grass and sticks on this bank and bind them together to make a raft, boarding which I can cross over.” So he collects grass and sticks on the bank, binds them together to make a raft, boards it, and crosses over, safely reaching the farther bank. In the same way, Ānanda, it may be that a monk lays hold of disen chantment, inclines to disenchantment, and becomes established in dis enchantment through having appeased bodily evils and through attaining mental separation and samādhi. Secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, he dwells having attained the first absorption, in which there is [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion. On the basis of this attainment, he contemplates the rise and fall of feeling.^265 Having, on the basis of this attainment, contemplated the rise and fall of feeling and become established in it, he will certainly attain the destruction of the taints. If, [however], despite being established in it, he does not attain destruction of the taints, then he must progress to a higher level of tranquility.^266 How does he progress to a higher level of tranquility? With the calming of [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with inner stillness and mental unification, he dwells having attained the second absorption, which is without [directed] awareness and without [sustained] contem plation and with rapture and happiness born of samādhi. On the basis of this attainment, he contemplates the rise and fall of feeling. Having, on the basis of this attainment, contemplated the rise and fall of feeling and become established in it, he will certainly attain the destruction of the taints. If, [however], despite being established in it, he does not attain the destruction of the taints, then he must progress to a higher level of tranquility. How does he progress to a higher level of tranquility? Secluded from rap ture and pleasure, dwelling in equanimity and without longings, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, experiencing happiness with the body, he dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mindfulness, a happy abode. On the basis of this attainment, he contemplates the rise and fall of

feeling. Having, on the basis of this attainment, contemplated the rise and fall of feeling and become established in it, he will certainly attain the destruction of the taints. If, [however], despite being established in it, he does not attain the destruction of the taints, then he must progress to a higher level of tranquility. How does he progress to a higher level of tranquility? With the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of rapture and displeasure, with neither-pain-nor-pleasure, and with purity of mind- fulness and equanimity, he dwells having attained the fourth absorption. On the basis of this attainment he contemplates the rise and fall of feel- ing. Having, on the basis of this attainment, contemplated the rise and fall of feeling and become established in it, he will certainly attain the destruc- tion of the taints. If, [however], despite being established in it, he does not attain the destruction of the taints, then he must progress to a higher level of tranquility. How does he progress to a higher level of tranquility? By completely transcending perceptions of form, with the cessation of perceptions of sensory impact, not aware of perceptions of diversity, [aware] of infinite space,^267 he dwells having attained the sphere of infinite space. On the basis of this attainment, he contemplates the rise and fall of feeling. Having, on the basis of this attainment, contemplated the rise and fall of feeling and become established in it, he will certainly attain the destruction of the taints. If, [however], despite being established in it, he does not attain the destruction of the taints, then he must progress to a higher level of tranquility. How does he progress to a higher level of tranquility? By completely transcending the sphere of infinite space, [aware] of infinite consciousness, he dwells having attained the sphere of infinite consciousness. On the basis of this attainment, he contemplates the rise and fall of feeling. Having, on the basis of this attainment, contemplated the rise and fall of feeling and become established in it, he will certainly attain the destruction of the taints. If, [however], despite being established in it, he does not attain the destruction of the taints, then he must progress to a higher level of tranquility.

How does he progress to a higher level of tranquility? By completely transcending the sphere of infinite consciousness, [aware that] ‘there is nothing,’ he dwells having attained the sphere of nothingness. Whatever feeling there is, be it pleasant or painful or neutral, he con templates that feeling as impermanent, contemplates its rise and fall, con templates its fading away, contemplates its cessation, contemplates its aban donment, and contemplates its relinquishment. Having in this way contemplated this feeling as impermanent, contemplated its rise and fall, contemplated its fading away, contemplated its cessation, contemplated its abandonment, and contemplated its relinquishment, he does not cling to this world. Not clinging to this world, he is without agitation. Being without agitation, he attains final nirvana, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Suppose that not far from a village there is a large plantain tree, and suppose a man with an ax were to cut down that plantain tree and cut it into pieces, cutting it into ten parts, or a hundred parts. Having cut it into ten parts or a hundred parts, he peels off leaf after leaf but does not see any nodes, let alone heartwood.^268 In the same way, Ānanda, whatever feeling there is, be it pleasant or painful or neutral, the monk contemplates that feeling as impermanent, contemplates its rise and fall, contemplates its fading away, contemplates its cessation, con templates its abandonment, and contemplates its relinquishment. Having in this way contemplated this feeling as impermanent, contemplated its rise and fall, contemplated its fading away, contemplated its cessation, contemplated its abandonment, and contemplated its relinquishment, he does not cling to this world. Not clinging to this world, he is without agitation. Being without agitation, he attains final nirvana, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Then the venerable Ānanda extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said: World-honored One, it is most wonderful, it is most remarkable, how the World-honored One has explained to the monks abandonment and separation

from the taints, [how he has] explained going beyond and crossing over the taints in reliance on one support after another. Yet the monks do not all quickly attain the highest, that is, complete and total cessation.^269 The World-honored One said: It is like this, Ānanda; it is like this, Ānanda. It is most wonderful, it is most remarkable how I have explained to the monks abandonment and separation from the taints, [how I have] explained going beyond and crossing over the taints in reliance on one support after another. Yet the monks do not all quickly attain the highest, that is, complete and total cessation. Why is that? It is because persons possess excellence according as their practice of the path is either refined or gross. And because their practice of the path is refined or gross, persons in turn possess excellence accordingly. Ānanda, for this reason I say, “Persons possess excellence accordingly.” Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Ānanda and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma205-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DN14]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA205]]
> ◄  [[ma204-bdk]] 📜  [[ma206-bdk]] ►
