---
sutta_code: "MA209"
sutta_title:
  - "鞞摩那修 "
  - "With Vekhanasa"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA209]]
> ◄  [[ma208-bdk]] 📜  [[ma210-bdk]] ►

### 209. The Discourse to Vekhanassa

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, staying in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa, while wandering about,^307 came to where the Buddha was and, after exchanging greetings, inquired, “Gotama, the supreme appearance? The supreme appearance, Gotama, the supreme appearance?” The World-honored One asked, “Kaccāna, what appearance?” The heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa replied: Gotama, if no other appearance is superior, more sublime, more excellent than that appearance, then, Gotama, that appearance is the most excellent, that appearance is supreme! The World-honored One said: Kaccāna, this is just as if someone were to speak like this: “Whichever woman is the most beautiful in the country, I want her!” Suppose another man were to ask him, “Sir, regarding this most beautiful woman in the country, do you know her family name, her given name, and her birth sta- tus? Is she tall or short, stout or slim? Is she of light [complexion], or dark, or neither light nor dark? Is she a woman of the warrior class, or of the brahmin, or of the merchant, or of the worker class? Is she in the eastern region, the southern, the western, or the northern region?”—and that man were to answer, “I don’t know!”

And it is as if that other man were to ask him further, “Sir, regarding this most beautiful woman in the country whom you have not seen, you do not know her family name, her given name, or her birth status. [You do not know] if she is tall or short, stout or slim; if she is of light [com- plexion], or dark, or neither light nor dark; if she is a woman of the warrior class, or of the brahmin, or of the merchant, or of the worker class; if she is in the eastern region, the southern, the western, or the northern region— and yet you make this statement: ‘I want that woman!’” In the same way, Kaccāna, you make this statement: “That sublime appearance is the most sublime appearance. That appearance is the most excellent. That appearance is supreme.” But when I ask you about [the nature of] that appearance, you do not know. The heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa said: Gotama, just as when the most excellent gold, superbly refined, polished, and rendered pure by a goldsmith skilled in refining, is placed on a white cotton cloth in the sunshine, its most sublime appearance glows and shines with a clear light. In the same way, Gotama, I declare an appearance that surpasses [all other] appearances. That is the most excellent appearance. That is the supreme appearance. The World-honored One said: Kaccāna, I will now ask you a question. Answer in accordance with your understanding. Regarding that most excellent gold, which has been superbly refined, polished, and rendered pure by a goldsmith skilled in refining, and is placed on a white cotton cloth in the sunshine so that its most sublime appearance glows and shines with a clear light—Kaccāna, how do you think it compares with a glowworm glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night? Of these [two] clear lights which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the glowworm is supreme and more excellent than the clear light of the superbly refined and polished gold.” The World-honored One asked:

Kaccāna, what do you think of a glowworm glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night, compared with a burning oil lamp glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the burning oil lamp is supreme, more excellent than the clear light of the glowworm.” The World-honored One asked: Kaccāna, what do you think of a burning oil lamp glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night, compared with a great burning wood fire glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa replied: “Gotama, the clear light of the great burning wood fire is supreme, more excellent than the clear light of the burning oil lamp.” The World-honored One asked: Kaccāna, what do you think of a great burning wood fire glowing and shining with a clear light in the darkness of the night, compared with the morning star glowing and shining with a clear light toward dawn in a cloudless [sky]? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the morning star is supreme, more excellent than the light of the great burning wood fire.” The World-honored One asked: Kaccāna, what do you think of the morning star glowing and shining with a clear light toward dawn in a cloudless [sky], compared with the light of the resplendent moon in a cloudless [sky] at midnight, glowing and shining with a clear light? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent? The heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa replied, “Gotama, the clear light

of the resplendent moon is supreme, more excellent than the light of the morning star.” The World-honored One asked: Kaccāna, what do you think of the light of the resplendent moon in a cloudless [sky] at midnight glowing and shining with a clear light, com- pared with the light of the resplendent mid-autumn sun, glowing and shin- ing with a clear light in a cloudless [sky]? Of these [two] clear lights, which is supreme? Which is the more excellent?” The heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa replied, “Gotama, the clear light of the resplendent sun is supreme, more excellent than the light of the resplen- dent moon.” The World-honored One said: Kaccāna, there are many _deva_ s. Now, even though this sun and moon are of such great supernormal power, such great might, such great merit, such great majesty, yet their clear light cannot compare with the clear light of these _deva_ s. In former times I used to meet and converse with those _deva_ s, and what I said was agreeable to those _deva_ s. Nevertheless, I do not declare this: “That appearance surpasses [all other] appearances. That is the most excellent appearance. That is the supreme appearance.” But you, Kaccāna, regarding the most lowly light inferior to a glow- worm, declare: “That appearance surpasses [all other] appearances. That is the most excellent appearance. That is the supreme appearance!” And when asked about [the nature of] it, you do not know! Then the heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa, having been criticized to his face by the World-honored One, was upset and worried. He hung his head in silence, unable to reply, as if immersed in thought. Then, having criticized [Vekhanassa] to his face, the World-honored One sought to cheer him up, saying:

Kaccāna, there are the five strands of sensuality, which are delightful, thought about pleasurably by the mind, and connected with sensuality, [namely]: visible forms known by the eye, sounds known by the ear, odors known by the nose, flavors known by the tongue, and tangibles known by the body.

Kaccāna, visible forms may be desirable or undesirable. If a certain person finds this particular visible form agreeable, commendable, [conducive to] joy, fulfilling, satisfying, then [for that person] this one is supreme, more excellent than other types of form which are not desired, not wanted, not aspired to, not sought after. This is the most excellent, the supreme type of form [for that person]. Kaccāna, it is the same with sounds, odors, flavors, and tangibles. Kaccāna, tangibles may be desirable or undesirable. If a certain person finds this particular tangible to be agreeable, commend able, conducive to joy, fulfilling, satisfying, then [for that person] this one is supreme, more excellent than other types of tangible which are not desired, not wanted, not aspired to, not sought after. This is the most excel lent, the supreme type of tangible [for that person]. Then the heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa extended his hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said: It is wonderful, Gotama. It is remarkable how the renunciant Gotama has, by countless skillful means, explained to me sensual pleasures and the foremost sensual pleasure. Gotama, just as a grass fire may start a wood fire, or a wood fire may start a grass fire, in the same way the renunciant Gotama has, by various skillful means, explained to me sensual pleasures and the foremost sensual pleasure.^308 The World-honored One said: Stop, stop, Kaccāna, you have long been of a different view [from me], of a different belief, [seeking] a different type of happiness, a different type of pleasure, a different way of thinking; consequently, you do not fully understand the meaning of what I am saying. Kaccāna, there are disciples of mine who do not lie down to sleep during the first and last watches of the night, but with right samādhi and right intention cultivate the requisites of the path and come to know as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Only they would fully understand what I am saying. At this the heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa became angry with the Buddha. Dislike and disapproval arose [in him]. He wanted to slander the World-honored

One, wanted to slight the World-honored One; in order to slander the World- honored One, in order to slight the World-honored One, he said:

Gotama, there are renunciants and brahmins who do not know the past world, do not know the future world, and do not know countless births and deaths, yet claim to have attained final knowledge [thus]: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence; I know this as it really is.” Gotama, I think like this, “These renunciants and brahmins who do not know the past world, do not know the future world, and do not know countless births and deaths—how is it that they claim to have attained final knowledge [thus]: ‘Birth has been ended, the holy life has been estab lished, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another expe riencing of existence; I know it as it really is’?” Then the World-honored One reflected: This heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa became angry with me. Dislike and disapproval arose [in him]. He wanted to slander me, wanted to slight me. He slandered me and slighted me by saying “Gotama, there are renun ciants and brahmins who do not know the past world, do not know the future world, and do not know countless births and deaths, yet claim to have attained final knowledge [thus]: ‘Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence; I know it as it really is.’ Gotama, I think like this, ‘These renunciants and brahmins who do not know the past world, do not know the future world, and do not know countless births and deaths—how is it that they claim to have attained final knowl edge [thus]: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence; I know it as it really is”’?” Knowing this, the World-honored One said: Kaccāna, if there are renunciants and brahmins who do not know the past world, do not know the future world, and do not know countless births and deaths, yet claim to have attained final knowledge [thus]: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has

been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence; I know it as it really is”; then they should say this, “Let be the past world; let be the future world!”^309 Kaccāna, I [too] speak like this, “Let be the past world; let be the future world!” Even without recalling a single [past] life, if a monk disciple of mine comes to me, one who is not a fraud, not a deceiver, but is of upright character, then I teach him. If he practices in accordance with what I teach him, then he will certainly come to know the true Dharma. Kaccāna, it is just as with an infant boy, young and tender, lying on his back, whose hands and feet have been bound by his parents. Later when he has grown up and all his faculties are developed, his parents unbind his hands and feet; but he recalls only the time of being liberated,^310 and does not recall the time of being in bondage. In the same way, Kaccāna, I speak like this, “Let be the past world, let be the future world!” Even without recalling a single [past] life, if a monk disciple of mine comes to me, one who is not a fraud, not a deceiver, but is of upright character, then I teach him. If he practices in accordance with what I teach him, then he will certainly come to know the true Dharma. Kaccāna, it is just like a lamp that burns in dependence on oil and a wick. If nobody supplies oil and the wick is not adjusted, then when the original oil is exhausted and no more is supplied, [the flame] will soon go out for lack of fuel.^311 In the same way, Kaccāna, I speak like this, “Let be the past world, let be the future world!” Even without recalling a single [past] life, if a monk disciple of mine comes to me, one who is not a fraud, not a deceiver, but is of upright character, then I teach him. If he practices in accordance with what I teach him, then he will certainly come to know the true Dharma. Kaccāna, it is just as one might use ten or twenty or thirty or forty or fifty or sixty bundles of wood to keep a fire blazing brightly,^312 and one sees that fire blazing. Later, if no one supplies more grass, wood, chaff, or rags, then when the original firewood is exhausted and no more is sup plied, it will soon go out for lack of fuel.^313 In the same way, Kaccāna, I speak like this, “Let be the past world; let be the future world!” Even without recalling a single [past] life, if a monk disciple of mine comes who is not a fraud, not a deceiver, but is of upright

character, then I teach him. If he practices in accordance with what I teach him, then he will certainly come to know the true Dharma. When this teaching was being given, there arose in the heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa the stainless dustless eye of the Dharma in regard to all phenom- ena.^314 Then the heterodox practitioner Vekhanassa saw the Dharma, attained the Dharma, realized the totally pure Dharma. There was [now] no other teacher for him; he would no longer rely on others. Having cut off doubt, crossed over confusion, become free from hesitation, he was established in the realization of the fruit. He had attained intrepidity in the Dharma of the World-honored One. He paid homage with his head at the Buddha’s feet and said:

World-honored One, I wish to obtain the going forth from the Buddha to train in the path. [May I receive] the full ordination and become a monk to practice the holy life! The World-honored One said, “Welcome,^315 monk! Practice the holy life!” The heterodox practitioner obtained from the Buddha the going forth to train in the path. He received the full ordination and became a monk to practice the holy life. The venerable Vekhanassa, having gone forth to train in the path, having received the full ordination, came to know the Dharma and see the Dharma... up to... attained arahantship. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the venerable Vekhanassa and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma209-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA209]]
> ◄  [[ma208-bdk]] 📜  [[ma210-bdk]] ►
