---
sutta_code: "MA212"
sutta_title:
  - "一切智 "
  - "Omniscience"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA212]]
> ◄  [[ma211-bdk]] 📜  [[ma213-bdk]] ►

### 212. The Discourse on Omniscience

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Ujuññā in the Kaṇṇakatthala Grove. At that time King Pasenadi of Kosala heard that the renunciant Gotama was staying at Ujuññā in the Kaṇṇakatthala Grove. Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala told a certain man:

Go to the renunciant Gotama and ask on my behalf if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable and free of ailments, and dwelling at ease with his usual vigor. Speak like this: “King Pasenadi of Kosala inquires if you are healthy and strong, comfortable and free of ailments, and dwelling at ease with your usual vigor.” Also say this: “King Pasenadi of Kosala would like to come and visit you.” Having received this order, that man approached the Buddha, exchanged greetings, stepped back, sat to one side, and said:

Gotama, King Pasenadi of Kosala inquires if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable and free of ailments, and dwelling at ease with your usual vigor. King Pasenadi of Kosala would like to come and visit you. The World-honored One replied: May King Pasenadi of Kosala now find peace and happiness! May all _deva_ s, human beings, _asura_ s, _gandhabba_ s, _yakkha_ s, and all other forms of life find peace and happiness! If King Pasenadi of Kosala wishes to come, let him feel free to do so.^355 Then, having heard what the Buddha had said, having received and remem- bered it well, the messenger rose from his seat, circumambulated [the Buddha] three times, and left.

At that time the venerable Ānanda was standing behind the World-honored One, holding a flywhisk and attending on the Buddha. After the messenger had left, the World-honored One turned to him and said: Ānanda, come with me to the Eastern Hall, open the windows and close the door, [we shall] remain in that secluded place. Today King Pasenadi of Kosala has a collected mind without distraction, he wishes to listen to the Dharma. The venerable Ānanda said, “Yes.” Then the World-honored One led the venerable Ānanda to the Eastern Hall, who opened the windows, closed the door, and in that secluded place arranged the sitting mats. Having spread their sitting cloths, they sat down cross-legged. By that time the messenger had returned to King Pasenadi of Kosala. He told him, “Your Majesty, I have communicated [the message] to the renunciant Gotama. The renunciant Gotama now awaits Your Majesty. May Your Majesty himself know the proper time.” King Pasenadi of Kosala told his charioteer, “Prepare the chariot! I desire to go now and see the renunciant Gotama.” The charioteer received the instruction and prepared the chariot. At that time the sisters Sakulā and Somā, [wives of] King Pasenadi of Kos ala, were sitting together with him taking a meal. On hearing that King Pasenadi of Kosala would be going that day to visit the Buddha, they said to him: Great King, if you are now going to visit the World-honored One, we request that you pay respects to the World-honored One on our behalf and ask if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable and free of ailments, and dwelling at ease with his usual vigor. Speak like this: “The sisters Sakulā and Somā pay their respects to the World-honored One and inquire if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable and free of ailments, and dwelling at ease with his usual vigor.” King Pasenadi of Kosala accepted the request of the sisters Sakulā and Somā by remaining silent. Then the charioteer, having prepared the chariot, informed him, “Your Majesty, the chariot is ready and at Your Majesty’s disposal.” Having heard

it, the king mounted the chariot and drove out of Ujuññā to the Kaṇṇakatthala Grove. At that time, outside the entrance to the Kaṇṇakatthala Grove, there were many monks practicing walking meditation in the open. King Pasenadi of Kosala approached these monks and asked, “Venerable ones, where is the renunciant Gotama now? I wish to go and see him.” The monks answered: Great King! The World-honored One is in the Eastern Hall, whose windows are open and the door is closed. If Your Majesty wishes to see him, he may go there, stand outside, clear his throat, and knock on the door. Hearing that, the World-honored One will certainly have the door opened.^356 King Pasenadi of Kosala descended from his chariot and, surrounded by his retainers, walked to the Eastern Hall. Having arrived there he stood outside, cleared his throat, and knocked on the door. Having heard this, the World-honored One had the door opened. King Pasenadi of Kosala entered the hall and went up to the Buddha. He addressed him:

Gotama, the sisters Sakulā and Somā pay their respects to the World-honored One and inquire if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable and free of ailments, and if he is dwelling at ease with his usual vigor. The World-honored One asked the king, “Could the sisters Sakulā and Somā find no other messenger?” King Pasenadi of Kosala said: Gotama, please know that the sisters Sakulā and Somā were sitting with me today having a meal. They heard that I desired to go and visit the Buddha today, so they said, “Great King, if you are going to see the Buddha, pay respects to the World-honored One on our behalf and ask if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable, and free of ail- ments, and if he is dwelling at ease with his usual vigor.” Accordingly I addressed the World-honored One like this: “The sisters Sukulā and Somā pay their respects to the World-honored One and inquire if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable, and free of ailments, and if he is dwelling at ease with his usual vigor.” Gotama, Sakulā and Somā pay

their respects to the World-honored One and ask if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable and free of ailments, and if he is dwelling at ease with his usual vigor. The World-honored One answered: Great King, may the sisters Sakulā and Somā find peace and happiness! May all _deva_ s, human beings, _asura_ s, _gandhabba_ s, _yakkha_ s, and all other forms of life find peace and happiness! Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, having exchanged greetings with the Buddha, stepped back, sat to one side, and said, “Gotama, I would like to ask a question. If permitted, may I will venture to state it?” The World-honored One told him, “Great King, ask whatever you wish to ask.” Then King Pasenadi of Kosala asked: Gotama, I have heard that the renunciant Gotama has spoken like this: “There never was, there never will be, nor is there in the present, some renunciant or brahmin who knows all, who sees all.” Gotama, do you recall having spoken like that? The World-honored One answered: Great King, I do not recall having spoken like this: “There never was, there never will be, nor is there in the present some renunciant or brahmin who knows all, who sees all.” At that time the general Viḍūḍabha was standing behind King Pasenadi of Kosala, holding a flywhisk and fanning the king. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala turned around and said to General Viḍūḍabha:

Some days ago, when the king was seated together with the great assembly, who was the first to say that the renunciant Gotama makes such a state- ment,”There never was, there never will be, nor is there in the present some renunciant or brahmin who knows all, who sees all”? General Viḍūḍabha answered, “Your Majesty, it was the young [brahmin] Sañjaya Ākāsagotta who first said that.”

King Pasenadi of Kosala said to a certain man, “Go to the young [brahmin] Sañjaya Ākāsagotta and speak to him like this: ‘King Pasenadi of Kosala summons you.’” Having received the order, that man approached the young [brahmin] Sañ- jaya Ākāsagotta and spoke like this: “Young [brahmin], King Pasenadi of Kosala summons you.” After that man had left, King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the World-honored One:

Renunciant Gotama, could there have been a different saying [by you] that has been taken differently? What does the renunciant Gotama recall having said? The World-honored One answered: Great King, I recall having spoken like this: “There never was, there never will be, nor is there in the present some renunciant or brahmin who knows all at one time, who sees all at one time.” Great King, I recall having spoken like this. Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala praised him, saying: The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a teacher. The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a skilled teacher. I would like to ask another question. Am I permitted to ask it? The World-honored One told him, “Great King, ask whatever you wish to ask.” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Gotama, there are these four castes: war- riors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. Is there a distinction, a difference among them?” The World-honored One answered: There are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers; and there is a distinction, a difference among them. People consider the warriors and brahmins to be of superior virtue, and people consider the merchants and workers to be of inferior virtue. There are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers; and this is a distinction, a difference [among them].

Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala praised him, saying, “The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a teacher. The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a skilled teacher.”^357 King Pasenadi of Kosala said: Gotama, I was not, however, asking only about their benefits in the present life; I would also like to ask about their benefits in future lives. Am I per mitted to ask this? The World-honored One told him, “Great King, ask whatever you wish to ask.” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked: Gotama, there are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. Is there a distinction, a difference [among them] with regard to future lives? The World-honored One answered: There are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers; and there is a distinction, a difference [among them] with regard to future lives. There are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. If they accomplish the five factors of striving and indeed get as their skilled teacher the Tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awak ened, [then] they will certainly gain inspiration [from him], will not be without inspiration; and they will gain long-lasting benefit, well-being, peace, and happiness. What are these five? The learned noble disciple has faith in the Tathā gata, deeply rooted and firmly established, which cannot be taken away by anyone—whether renunciant, brahmin, deva , māra, Brahmā, or anyone else in the world. This is the first factor of striving. Again, Great King, the learned noble disciple has little disease, is free of ailments; he has a balanced digestion of food, neither too hot nor too cold, easy and balanced; whether of food or of drink, his digestion is easy and without disturbance. This is the second factor of striving. Again, Great King, the learned noble disciple neither flatters nor lies, but is honest, showing himself as he really is to the World-honored One and to his companions in the holy life. This is the third factor of striving.

Again, Great King, the learned noble disciple is energetic at all times in discarding what is evil and unwholesome, and in cultivating wholesome states. He takes the initiative constantly and remains wholeheartedly and steadfastly established in the roots of wholesomeness, without giving up the task. This is the fourth factor of striving. Again, Great King, the learned noble disciple develops understanding and wisdom. By observing the rise and fall of phenomena he gains such understanding, noble penetrative wisdom, and discriminative comprehen- sion as brings about the true cessation of _dukkha._ This is the fifth factor of striving. There are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. If they accomplish these five factors of striving and indeed get as their skilled teacher a tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened; [then] they will certainly gain inspiration [from him], will not be without inspiration; and they will gain long-lasting benefit, well-being, peace, and happiness. There are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. This is a distinction, a difference [among them] with regard to future lives. Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala praised him, saying: The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a teacher. The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a skilled teacher. I would like to ask another question. Am I permitted to ask it? The World-honored One told him, “Great King, ask whatever you wish to ask.” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked: Gotama, there are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. Is there a distinction, a difference [among them] with regard to the practice of striving? The World-honored One answered: There are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers; and there is a distinction, a difference [among them] with regard to their practice of striving.

What do you think, Great King? That the striving of someone with faith might be matched by the striving of someone without faith—this is not at all possible. That the striving of someone with few ailments might be matched by the striving of someone with many ailments—this is not at all possible. That the striving of someone who abstains from flattering and lying might be matched by the striving of someone who flatters and lies—this is not at all possible. That the striving of someone who has energy might be matched by the striving of a lazy person—this is not at all possible. That the striving of someone with comprehension and wisdom might be matched by the striving of someone who is unwise—this is not at all possible. It is just as if there were four [kinds of beings] to be tamed—elephants to be tamed, horses to be tamed, oxen to be tamed, and human beings to be tamed—and among those, two to be tamed cannot be subdued, cannot be disciplined, while two to be tamed can be subdued, can be disciplined. What do you think, Great King? That the two to be tamed that cannot be subdued, cannot be disciplined, might attain the stages of being subdued, the stages of being disciplined, and accept taming—this is not possible. That the two to be tamed that can be subdued, that can be disciplined, might attain the stages of being subdued, the stages of being disciplined, and accept taming—this is certainly possible. In the same way, Great King, what do you think? That the striving of someone with faith might be matched by the striving of someone without faith—this is not at all possible. That the striving of someone with few ailments might be matched by the striving of someone with many ail ments—this is not at all possible. That the striving of someone who abstains from flattering and lying might be matched by the striving of someone who flatters and lies—this is not at all possible. That the striving of some one who has energy might be matched by the striving of a lazy person— this is not at all possible. That the striving of someone with comprehension and wisdom might be matched by the striving of someone who is unwise— this is not at all possible. There are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. This is a distinction, a difference [among them] with regard to their practice of striving.

Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala praised him, saying: The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a teacher. The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a skilled teacher. I would like to ask another question. Am I permitted to ask it?” The World-honored One answered, “Great King, ask whatever you wish to ask.” King Pasenadi of Kosala asked: Gotama, there are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. Is there a distinction, a difference [among them] with regard to striving itself? The World-honored One answered: There are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. They are equal in regard to striving, there is no distinction, no difference [between them] with regard to striving itself. Great King, suppose that a warrior youth coming from the east takes a dry piece of _sāla_ wood as the lower firestick and by drilling it with a drill produces fire; a brahmin youth coming from the south, takes a dry piece of _sāla_ wood as the lower firestick and by drilling it with a drill produces fire; a merchant youth coming from the west takes a dry piece of sandalwood as the lower firestick and by drilling it with a drill produces fire; a worker youth coming from the north takes a dry piece of botoumo wood as the lower firestick and by drilling it with a drill produces fire. What do you think, Great King? Those persons of various castes, using various kinds of wood as the lower firestick, by drilling it with a drill pro- duce fire; and someone [else] brings dry grass and wood and produces smoke, flames, and color. Great King, would you be able to tell any dif- ference between this smoke and that smoke, this flame and that flame, this color and that color? King Pasenadi of Kosala replied: Gotama, those persons of various castes, using various kinds of wood as the lower firestick, by drilling it with a drill produce fire; and someone

[else] brings dry grass and wood and produces smoke, flames, and color. Gotama, I would not be able to tell any difference between this smoke and that smoke, this flame and that flame, this color and that color. [The World-honored One said:] In the same way, Great King, there are these four castes: warriors, brahmins, merchants, and workers. They are completely equal in regard to striving, there is no distinction, no difference [among them] with regard to striving itself. Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala praised him, saying: The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a teacher. The renunciant Gotama has spoken like a skilled teacher. I would like to ask another question. Am I permitted to ask it? The World-honored One said, “Great King, ask whatever you wish to ask.” King Pasenadi of Kosala, asked, “Gotama, are there _deva_ s?” The World-honored One asked, “Great King, why do you ask whether there are _deva_ s?” King Pasenadi of Kosala answered: Gotama, [I wish to ask] whether _deva_ s who are disputatious, fond of dis- puting, are destined to come [back] to this [human] realm; and whether _deva_ s who are not disputatious, not fond of disputing, are destined not to come [back] to this [human] realm. At that time General Viḍūḍabha was standing behind King Pasenadi of Kos- ala, holding a fan and fanning the king.^358 General Viḍūḍabha said:

Gotama, if deva s are not disputatious, not fond of disputing, they do not come [back] to this [human] realm, but stay in their heaven. If deva s are disputatious, fond of disputing, and they come [back] to this [human] realm. The renunciant Gotama will certainly say that those [other] deva s [in their heaven] have superior merit [as a result of their] superior [former] practice of the holy life. [Yet] can the deva s [here], at will, drive out those other deva s [from their heaven] and banish them?

At that time the venerable Ānanda was standing behind the World-honored One, holding a flywhisk and attending on the Buddha. Then the venerable Ānanda thought, “This General Viḍūḍabha is a son of King Pasenadi of Kosala and I am a son of the World-honored One. Now is the right time for a discussion between son and son.” Thereupon the venerable Ānanda said to General Viḍūḍabha: I would like to ask you something; answer according to your understanding. What do you think, General? Within the borders of the realm of King Pase- nadi of Kosala, as far as his command extends, can King Pasenadi of Kosala drive out and banish [others] at will, [even those] who have exceptional merit because they had lived an exceptional holy life? General Viḍūḍabha answered: Renunciant, within the borders of the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala, as far as his command extends, King Pasenadi of Kosala can drive out and banish [others] at will, [even those] who have exceptional merit because they had lived an exceptional holy life. [The venerable Ānanda asked:] What do you think, General, outside the borders of the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala to which his command does not extend, can King Pasenadi of Kosala drive out and banish [others] at will, [leave alone those] who have exceptional merit because they had lived an exceptional holy life? General Viḍūḍabha answered: Renunciant, outside the borders of the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala, to which his command does not extend, King Pasenadi of Kosala cannot drive out and banish [others] at will, [leave alone those] who have excep- tional merit because they had lived an exceptional holy life. The venerable Ānanda asked again, “General, have you heard of the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three?” General Viḍūḍabha answered, “During my stay with King Pasenadi of Kosala I have heard of the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three.”

[The venerable Ānanda asked:] What do you think, General, can King Pasenadi of Kosala drive out and banish those _deva_ s of the Thirty-three at will who have exceptional merit because they had lived an exceptional holy life? General Viḍūḍabha answered: Renunciant, King Pasenadi of Kosala cannot even see the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three. How much less could he drive them out and banish them! [That] he might drive out and banish the _deva_ s of the Thirty-three, this is not at all possible. [The venerable Ānanda said:] In the same way, General, those _deva_ s who are not disputatious, not fond of disputing, and who do not come [back] to this [human] realm, have superior merit because of their superior [former] practice of the holy life. Those _deva_ s who are disputatious, fond of disputing, and do come [back] to this [human] realm, those _deva_ s cannot even see those other _deva_ s [in their heavens], much less drive them out and banish them.^359 That they might drive out and banish those other _deva_ s [from their heaven], this is not at all possible. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala asked, “Gotama, what is the name of this renunciant?” The World-honored One answered, “Great King, this monk is named Ānanda. He is my attendant.” Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala praised him, saying, “Ānanda has spoken like a teacher. Ānanda has spoken like a skillful teacher. I would like to ask another question. Am I permitted to ask it?” The World-honored One answered, “Great King, ask whatever you wish to ask.” King Pasenadi of Kosala, asked, “Gotama, are there Brahmās?” The World-honored One asked, “Great King, why do you ask whether there are Brahmās? Great King, what I designate as Brahmās, those Brahmās are pure.”^360

While the World-honored One and King Pasenadi of Kosala were dis- cussing these matters, the messenger returned with the young [brahmin] Sañ- jaya Ākāsagotta. He went to King Pasenadi of Kosala and said, “Your Majesty, the young [brahmin] Sañjaya Ākāsagotta has come here.” Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala asked the young [brahmin] Sañjaya Ākāsagotta:

Some days ago, when the king was seated together with the great assembly, who was the first to say that the renunciant Gotama makes such a statement: “There never was, there never will be, nor is there in the present another renunciant or brahmin who knows all, who sees all”? The young [brahmin] Sañjaya Ākāsagotta answered, “Your Majesty, it was General Viḍūḍabha who said that first.” Having heard this, General Viḍūḍabha said, “Your Majesty, this young [brahmin] Sañjaya Ākāsagotta said it first.” While those two men were arguing thus, in the midst of this the charioteer, who had prepared the chariot, went to King Pasenadi of Kosala and said, “Your Majesty, the chariot is ready. May Your Majesty know the proper time.” Having heard this, King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the World-honored One:

I have asked [the renunciant] Gotama about omniscience and the renunciant Gotama has answered me regarding omniscience. I have asked the renun- ciant Gotama about the purity of the four castes and the renunciant Gotama has answered me regarding the purity of the four castes. I have asked the renunciant Gotama about attainment and the renunciant Gotama has answered me regarding attainment. I have asked the renunciant Gotama about the existence of Brahmās and the renunciant Gotama has answered me regarding the existence of Brahmās. Whatever other matters I have asked, the renunciant Gotama has certainly answered me on those other matters. Gotama, I have many things to attend to now. Desiring to return, I take my leave. The World-honored One answered, “The Great King himself knows the proper time.”

King Pasenadi of Kosala, having heard what the World-honored One had said, received it well and kept it in mind. Then he rose from his seat, circum ambulated the World-honored One three times, and left. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, King Pase nadi of Kosala, the venerable Ānanda, and all the others in the great assembly were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma212-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN4.68]], [[PLI-TV-KD17]], [[SN6.12]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA212]]
> ◄  [[ma211-bdk]] 📜  [[ma213-bdk]] ►
