---
sutta_code: "MA215"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahāpuṇṇama Sutta "
  - "Longer Discourse on the Full-Moon Night"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA215]]
> ◄  [[ma214-bdk]] 📜  [[ma216-bdk]] ►

### 215. The Discourse on Attaining the Best

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One told the monks: Within the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala, as far as his command extends, there King Pasenadi of Kosala is the foremost one. [Yet even] for King Pasenadi of Kosala there is change and alteration. Contemplating this, the learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted. Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate about the foremost one, not to mention inferior ones. The realm of the sun and moon, [that is to say,] wherever their light shines, all the region in which their light shines, is called the thousandfold world-system. In the thousandfold world-system there are a thousand

suns, a thousand moons, a thousand [continents called] Pubbavideha, a thousand [called] Jambudīpa, a thousand [called] Aparagoyāna, a thousand [called] Uttarakuru, and a thousand mountains [called] Sumeru; [there are] a thousand of the Four Great Heavenly Kings, a thousand sons of the Four Heavenly Kings, a thousand of the deva s of the Thirty-three, a thou sand of the deva king Sakka, a thousand of the deva Yāma, a thousand sons of the deva Yāma, a thousand Tusita deva s, a thousand sons of the Tusita deva s, a thousand of the deva s that delight in their own creation, a thousand sons of the deva s that delight in their own creation, a thousand of the deva s that delight in others’ creations, a thousand sons of the deva s that delight in others’ creations, a thousand Brahmā worlds, and a thousand individual Brahmās.^381 Among these there is one Brahmā, [namely] Mahābrahmā, who is greatly venerated as the father who created [all] beings, who existed in the past and will exist [forever]. [Yet even] for Mahābrahmā there is change and alteration. Contemplating this, the learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted. Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate about the foremost one, not to mention inferior ones. At a later time this world will come to destruction. When this world comes to destruction, [certain] beings will be reborn among the deva s of Radiance. There they will acquire a form that is mind-made and complete in every respect. Their limbs will not wither, nor will their senses decline. They will feed on joy, their form will be pure and immaculate. With radiant bodies, they will fly through space. They will dwell there for a very long time. [Yet even] for the deva s of Radiance there is change and alteration. Contemplating this, the learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted. Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate about the foremost one, not to mention inferior ones. Again, there are four perceptions.^382 A monk may have perception of the limited, perception of the great, perception of the immeasurable, or perception of nothingness. [Yet even] for living beings who delight in such perceptions and are mentally resolved on them, there is change and alteration. Contemplating this, the learned noble disciple becomes disen chanted. Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate about the foremost one, not to mention inferior ones.

Again, there are eight spheres of transcendence. What eight? A monk, while perceiving forms internally, contemplates externally forms that are limited, beautiful or ugly. Having transcended these forms, he knows it; having transcended them, he sees it. Having such a perception is the first sphere of transcendence. Again, a monk, while perceiving forms internally, contemplates exter- nally forms that are immeasurable, beautiful or ugly. Having transcended these forms, he knows; having transcended them, he sees. Having such a perception is the second sphere of transcendence. Again, a monk, while not perceiving any forms internally, contemplates forms externally that are limited, beautiful or ugly. Having transcended these forms, he knows it; having transcended them, he sees it. Having such a perception is the third sphere of transcendence. Again, a monk, while not perceiving any forms internally, contemplates forms externally that are immeasurable, beautiful, or ugly. Having tran- scended these forms, he knows it; having transcended them, he sees it. Having such a perception is the fourth sphere of transcendence. Again, a monk, while not perceiving any forms internally, contemplates externally forms that are blue, blue in color, blue in appearance, blue- tinted. It is just as the blue water lily is blue, blue in color, blue in appear- ance, blue-tinted; and it is just as a fine cloth from Benares that, being well pressed and ironed, may have been dyed a bright blue, blue in color, blue in appearance, blue-tinted. In the same way a monk while not perceiving any forms internally, con- templates externally forms that are blue, blue in color, blue in appearance, blue-tinted. [His mind becomes] immeasurable. [Having become] immeas- urable, his mind is cleansed and fresh, happy and free from ill will. Having transcended these forms, he knows it; having transcended them, he sees it. Having such a perception is the fifth sphere of transcendence. Again, a monk, while not perceiving any forms internally, contemplates externally forms that are yellow, yellow in color, yellow in appearance, yellow-tinted. It is just as the yellow hibiscus is yellow, yellow in color, yellow in appearance, yellow-tinted;^383 and it is just as a fine cloth from Benares that, being well pressed and ironed, may have been dyed a bright yellow, yellow in color, yellow in appearance, yellow-tinted.

In the same way a monk, while not perceiving any forms internally, contemplates externally forms that are yellow, yellow in color, yellow in appearance, yellow-tinted. [His mind becomes] immeasurable. [Having become] immeasurable, his mind is cleansed and fresh, happy and free from ill will. Having transcended these forms, he knows it; having tran scended them, he sees it. Having such a perception is the sixth sphere of transcendence. Again, a monk, while not perceiving any forms internally, contemplates externally forms that are red, red in color, red in appearance, red-tinted. It is just as the kaṇṇikāra flower is red, red in color, red in appearance, red-tinted; and it is just as a fine cloth from Benares that, being well pressed and ironed, may have been dyed a bright red, red in color, red in appear ance, red-tinted. In the same way a monk, while not perceiving any forms internally, contemplates externally forms that are red, red in color, red in appearance, red-tinted. [His mind becomes] immeasurable. [Having become] immeas urable, his mind is cleansed and fresh, happy and free from ill will. Having transcended these forms, he knows it; having transcended them, he sees it. Having such a perception is the seventh sphere of transcendence. Again, a monk, while not perceiving any forms internally, contemplates externally forms that are white, white in color, white in appearance, white tinted. It is just as the planet <Venus> is white in color,^384 white in appear ance, white-tinted; and it is just as a fine cloth from Benares that, being dyed, well pressed and ironed, may have been dyed a bright white, white in color, white in appearance, white-tinted. In the same way a monk, while not perceiving any form internally, contemplates externally forms that are white, white in color, white in appearance, white-tinted. [His mind becomes] immeasurable. [Having become] immeasurable, his mind is cleansed and fresh, happy and free from ill will. Having transcended these forms, he knows it; having tran scended them, he sees it. Having such a perception is the eighth sphere of transcendence. [Yet even] for living beings who delight in such spheres of transcen dence and are mentally resolved on them, there is change and alteration. Contemplating this, the learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted.

Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate about the foremost one, not to mention inferior ones. Again, there are ten all-encompassing spheres ( _kasiṇa_ ). What are the ten? Here a monk cultivates the unity of the sphere of infinite earth, attending to it above, below, and in all directions as undivided. He cultivates the unity of the sphere of infinite water... the sphere of infinite fire... the sphere of infinite wind... the sphere of infinite blue... the sphere of infinite yellow... the sphere of infinite red... the sphere of infinite white... the sphere of infinite space... the sphere of infinite consciousness as the tenth, attending to it above, below, and in all directions as undivided. [Yet even] for living beings who delight in such all-encompassing spheres and are mentally resolved on them, there is change and alteration. Contemplating this, the learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted. Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate about the foremost one, not to mention inferior ones. This is the foremost of teachings about purification, designated as the foremost, namely, “I am not, I do not exist.” And for the purpose of its realization a path has been designated. This is the foremost among heterodox views, the best among heterodox views, namely, “Completely transcending perceptions of form... up to... he enters and dwells in the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception.” This is the foremost among realizations here and now: seeking to attain nirvana. Among realizations here and now nirvana is designated the best, that is: seeing with wisdom, as it really is, the arising of the six sense spheres, their ceasing, the gratification in them, and separation from them. And for the purpose of its realization a path has been designated. Again, there are four modes of abandoning. What are the four? There is abandoning that is pleasant and slow, abandoning that is pleasant and quick, abandoning that is painful and slow, and abandoning that is painful and quick. Of these, the abandoning that is pleasant and slow I declare to be inferior because it is pleasant and slow.^385 [Of these], as for the abandoning that is pleasant and quick, I declare to be because it is pleasant and quick.^386 Of these, as for the abandoning that is painful and slow, I also declare it to be inferior because it is painful and slow. As for the abandoning that

is painful and quick, because it is painful and quick, I have not proclaimed this [type of] abandoning widely and made it known among deva s and humankind, so it cannot be said to be widely proclaimed. I have, [however], proclaimed widely my [type of] abandoning, and made it known among deva s and humankind, so it can be said to be widely proclaimed. What do I mean by “my [type of] abandoning,” which I have proclaimed widely and made known among deva s and humankind? It is the eightfold path, right view... up to... right samādhi— these are the eight. This is my [type of] abandoning, which I have pro claimed widely and made known among deva s and humankind, and which can therefore be said to be widely known. This I have done. Renunciants and brahmins have, with empty falsehoods and lies, evil and untrue, misrepresented me [by saying], “He declares the annihilation of living beings that really exist. The renunciant Gotama declares anni hilation. He declares the annihilation of living beings that really exist.” [But] this is not so. This is not what I teach. [I say,] “The Tathāgata has, in the here and now, abandoned all.^387 He has attained peace, stillness, cessation [of dukkha ], nirvana.” At that time the monks, having heard what the Buddha said, were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma215-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M iii 15 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA24.10]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA215]]
> ◄  [[ma214-bdk]] 📜  [[ma216-bdk]] ►
