---
sutta_code: "MA211"
sutta_title:
  - "Sunakkhatta Sutta "
  - "With Sunakkhatta"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA211]]
> ◄  [[ma210-bdk]] 📜  [[ma212-bdk]] ►

### 211. The Discourse by Mahākoṭṭhita

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Rājagaha, staying in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.

At that time, in the late afternoon, the venerable Sāriputta rose from sitting in meditation and approached the venerable Mahākoṭṭhita. He exchanged friendly greetings, stepped back, and sat to one side. The venerable Sāriputta said, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, I would like to ask a question. Am I permitted to ask it?”^333 The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita said, “Venerable Sāriputta, ask what you wish to ask. Having heard it, I will consider it.” The venerable Sāriputta asked: Venerable Koṭṭhita, with regard to the unwholesome one speaks of “the unwholesome.” And with regard to the roots of unwholesomeness one speaks of “the roots of unwholesomeness.” What is unwholesome? What are the roots of unwholesomeness?^334 The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: Bad bodily conduct, [bad] verbal [conduct], bad mental conduct—these are unwholesome. Desire, aversion, and delusion—these are the roots of unwholesomeness. This is what is meant by “the unwholesome.” This is what is meant by “the roots of unwholesomeness.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further:

Venerable Koṭṭhita, with regard to the wholesome one speaks of “the wholesome.” And with regard to the roots of wholesomeness one speaks of “the roots of wholesomeness.” What is wholesome? What are the roots of wholesomeness? The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: Good bodily conduct, [good] verbal [conduct], good mental conduct—these are wholesome. Absence of desire, absence of aversion, and absence of delusion—these are the roots of wholesomeness. This is what is meant by “the wholesome.” This is what is meant by “the roots of wholesomeness.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta

was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, with regard to wisdom one speaks of ‘wisdom.’ What is wisdom?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: One knows, one knows;^335 therefore one speaks of wisdom. What does one know? One knows as it really is: “This is dukkha ”; one knows [as it really is]: “This is the arising of dukkha ”; one knows [as it really is]: “This is the cessation of dukkha ”; one knows as it really is: “This is the path to the cessation of dukkha. ” One knows, one knows; therefore one speaks of “wisdom.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, with regard to consciousness, one speaks of ‘con sciousness.’ What is consciousness?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: One is conscious, one is conscious; therefore one speaks of “consciousness.” Of what is one conscious? One is conscious of visible forms, conscious of sounds... odors... flavors... tangibles... mental objects.^336 One is conscious, one is conscious; therefore one speaks of “consciousness.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, wisdom and consciousness—are these two states conjoined or separate? Can these two states be designated as separate?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: These two states are conjoined, not separate. These two states cannot be designated as separate. Why is that? What one knows with wisdom, of that one is conscious by consciousness. Therefore, these two states are conjoined and not separate. These two states cannot be designated as separate.^337 On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta

was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, as regards knowing, through what do you know?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “As regards knowing, I know through wisdom.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, what is the purpose of wisdom? What is its excellence? What is its merit?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “Wisdom has the purpose of disen- chantment, the purpose of dispassion, the purpose of seeing as it really is.”^338 On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, what is right view?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “Knowing _dukkha_ as it really is, knowing the arising of _dukkha_... its cessation... the path as it really is— this is right view.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, how many causes, how many conditions are there for the arising of right view?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: There are two causes, two conditions for the arising of right view. What are the two? One: hearing from another; and two: giving reasoned attention within oneself. These are the two causes, the two conditions for the arising of right view. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further:

Venerable Koṭṭhita, assisted by how many factors does right view lead to the fruit of liberation of the mind and to the fruit of liberation through

wisdom, to the achievement of liberation of the mind and to the achieve- ment of liberation through wisdom? The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: Assisted by five factors, right view leads to the fruit of liberation of the mind and to the fruit of liberation through wisdom, to the achievement of liberation of the mind and to the achievement of liberation through wisdom. What are the five? One: assisted by truth, two: assisted by virtue, three: assisted by wide learning, four: assisted by tranquility, and five: assisted by insight.^339 These are the five factors, assisted by which right view leads to the fruit of liberation of the mind and to the fruit of liberation through wisdom, to the achievement of liberation of the mind and to the achieve- ment of liberation through wisdom. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, how does future becoming arise?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: The unlearned ignorant worldling, lacking knowledge, is shrouded in ignorance and fettered by the bondage of craving; he does not visit good spiritual friends, does not know the noble Dharma, and is not disciplined in the noble Dharma. This is how future becoming arises.^340 On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, how does future becoming not arise?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “If ignorance has ceased and knowl- edge has arisen, then there will certainly be the cessation of _dukkha._ This is how future becoming does not arise.”^341 On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, how many [types of] feeling are there?”

The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: There are three [types of] feeling: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, and neutral feeling. Because of what do they exist? They exist because of contact. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further:

Venerable Koṭṭhita, feeling, perception, and intention—are these three states conjoined or separate? Can these three states be designated as separate?^342 The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: Feeling, perception, and intention—these three states are conjoined and not separate. These three states cannot be designated as separate. Why is that? What one feels with feeling, that one perceives with perception and intends with intention. Therefore these three states are conjoined and not separate. These three states cannot be designated as separate. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, what is the counterpart to cessation?”^343 The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “Cessation does not have a coun- terpart.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further:

Venerable Koṭṭhita, the five [sense] faculties have their different activities, their different domains, each of them experiencing its own domain: the eye faculty, the ear... nose... tongue... and the body faculty. [As to] these five faculties with their different activities, their different domains, each of them experiencing its own domain—what experiences all of their domains? On what do they [all] depend?

The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: The five [sense] faculties have their different activities, their different domains, each of them experiencing its own domain: the eye faculty, the ear... nose... tongue... and body faculty. [As to] these five faculties with their different activities, their different domains, each experiencing its own domain—the mind experiences all of their domains. They [all] depend on the mind. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, depending on what does the mind continue to exist?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “The mind depends on vitality. Depending on vitality it continues to exist.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, depending on what does vitality continue to exist?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “Vitality depends on heat; depending on heat it continues to exist.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, vitality and heat—are these two states conjoined or separate? Can these two states be designated as separate?”^344 The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: Vitality and heat—these two states are conjoined and not separate. These two states cannot be designated as separate. Why is that? Because of vitality there is heat, and because of heat there is vitality. Without vitality there is no heat, without heat there is no vitality. It is just as a lamp burns because of oil and because of a wick. In this case, because of the flame there is light, and because of the light there is the flame. Without a flame there is no light, and without light there is no flame. In the same way, because of vitality there is heat, and because of heat

there is vitality. Without vitality there is no heat, and without heat there is no vitality. For this reason these two states are conjoined and not separate. These two states cannot be designated as separate. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further:

Venerable Koṭṭhita, how many are the factors of the living body upon the perishing of which the body will be discarded in a cemetery, being insen- tient like [a piece of] wood? The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: There are three factors of the living body upon the perishing of which the body will be discarded in a cemetery, being insentient like [a piece of] wood. What are the three? One: vitality, two: heat, and three: consciousness. These are the three factors of the living body on the perishing of which the body will be dis- carded in a cemetery, being insentient like a piece of wood. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, what is the difference between a dead person and one who has attained the samādhi of cessation?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: The vitality of a dead person has completely ceased, his heat has dissi- pated, and his faculties have broken down. The vitality of a monk who has entered the samādhi of cessation has not completely ceased, his heat has not dissipated, and his faculties have not broken down. This is the difference between a dead person and one who has attained the con- centration of cessation. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further:

Venerable Koṭṭhita, what is the difference between a person who has attained

the samādhi of cessation and one who has attained the samādhi of [neither-perception-nor-]nonperception?^345 The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: Perception and knowing cease [when] a monk enters the samādhi of cessation. Perception and knowing do not cease [when] a monk enters the samādhi of [neither-perception-nor-]nonperception. This is the difference between one who has attained the samādhi of cessation and one who has attained the samādhi of [neither-perception-nor-] nonperception. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying. “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further: Venerable Koṭṭhita, what is the difference between one who emerges from the samādhi of cessation and one who emerges from the samādhi of [neither-perception-nor-]nonperception? The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: When a monk emerges from the samādhi of cessation, he does not think, “I am emerging from the samādhi of cessation.” When a monk emerges from the samādhi of [neither-perception-nor-]non perception, he thinks, “Do I have perception or do I not have perception?” This is the difference between one who emerges from the samādhi of cessation and one who emerges from the samādhi of [neither perception-nor-]nonperception. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, when a monk attains the samādhi of cessation, which factor ceases first: bodily activity, verbal [activity], or mental activity?”^346 The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “When a monk attains the concen tration of cessation, bodily activity ceases first, next verbal activity ceases, and finally mental activity ceases.”^347 On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it

is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further:

Venerable Koṭṭhita, when a monk emerges from the samādhi of cessation, which factor arises first: bodily activity, verbal [activity], or mental activity? The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “When a monk emerges from the samādhi of cessation, mental activity arises first, next verbal activity arises, and finally bodily activity arises.”^348 On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, when a monk emerges from the samādhi of cessation, how many [types of] contact does he contact?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: When a monk emerges from the samādhi of cessation he contacts three types of contact. What are the three? One: imperturbability contact, two: nothingness contact, and three: signless contact.^349 When a monk emerges from the samādhi of cessation, he contacts these three types of contact. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked further:

Venerable Koṭṭhita, emptiness, desirelessness, and signlessness—are these three states different in meaning and different in name? Or are they of one meaning and different [only] in name? The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied, “Emptiness, desirelessness, and sign- lessness—these three states are different in meaning and [also] different in name.” On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, how many causes and conditions are there for the arising of the imperturbable samādhi?”^350 The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied:

There are four causes, four conditions for the arising of the imperturbable samādhi. What are the four? If secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states... up to... a monk dwells having attained the fourth absorption. These are the four causes, the four conditions for the arising of the imperturbable samādhi. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, how many causes and conditions are there for the arising of the samādhi on nothingness?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: There are three causes, three conditions for the arising of samādhi on nothingness. What are the three? If completely transcending perceptions of form... up to... a monk dwells having attained the sphere of noth ingness. These are the three causes, the three conditions for the arising of the samādhi on nothingness. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, how many causes and conditions are there for the arising of the signless samādhi?”^351 The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: There are two causes, two conditions for the arising of the signless con centration. What are the two? One: not being aware of any sign, and two: being aware of the signless element. These are the two causes, the two conditions for the arising of the signless samādhi. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, how many causes and conditions are there for remaining in the signless samādhi?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied:

There are two causes, two conditions for remaining in the signless con- centration. What are the two? One: not being aware of any sign, and two: being aware of the signless element.^352 These are the two causes, the two conditions for remaining in the signless samādhi. On hearing this, the venerable Sāriputta praised him, saying, “It is well, it is well, venerable Koṭṭhita!” Having praised him, the venerable Sāriputta was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] he asked fur- ther, “Venerable Koṭṭhita, how many causes and conditions are there for emerging from the signless samādhi?” The venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied: There are three causes, three conditions for emerging from the signless samādhi. What are the three? One: being aware of any sign; two: not being aware of the signless element; and three: the life faculty conditioned by this body with the six sense spheres.^353 These are the three causes, the three conditions for emerging from the signless samādhi. In this way those two venerable ones praised each other, saying, “It is well, it is well!” Having discussed with each other, they were delighted and received [those teachings] respectfully. They then rose from their seats and left.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma211-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA251]] | M ii 252 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA157]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-PJ1]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN106]], [[MN121.]], [[MN122]], [[MN44]], [[SN22.23]], [[SN22.79]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA211]]
> ◄  [[ma210-bdk]] 📜  [[ma212-bdk]] ►
