---
sutta_code: "MA210"
sutta_title:
  - "法樂比丘尼 "
  - "Nun Dhammanandā"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA210]]
> ◄  [[ma209-bdk]] 📜  [[ma211-bdk]] ►

### 210. The Discourse by the Nun Dhammanandā

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, staying in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the female lay disciple Visākhā approached the nun Dham- manandā,^317 paid homage with her head at her feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. She said to the nun Dhammanandā, “Noble one, I would like to ask a question. Am I permitted to ask it?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “Visākhā, ask what you wish to ask. Hav- ing heard it, I will consider it.” Then the female lay disciple Visākhā asked, “Noble one, we say ‘person- ality, personality.’ What is this ‘personality’?”

The nun Dhammanandā replied: The World-honored One has explained that the five aggregates of cling ing are [one’s] personality, the bodily form aggregate of clinging, the feeling... perception... formation... consciousness aggregate of cling ing—these are the five aggregates of clinging explained by the World honored One. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is personality view?” The nun Dhammanandā replied: An unlearned ignorant worldling does not visit good spiritual friends, does not know the noble Dharma, and is not disciplined in the noble Dharma. He sees the body as the self, or he sees the self as possessing the body, or he sees the body as contained within the self, or he sees the self as contained within the body. He sees feeling... perception... formations... He sees consciousness as the self, or he sees the self as possessing consciousness, or he sees consciousness as contained within the self, or he sees the self as contained within consciousness. This is personality view. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is absence of personality view?” The nun Dhammanandā replied: A learned noble disciple visits good spiritual friends, knows the noble Dharma, and is disciplined in the noble Dharma. He does not see the body as the self, he does not see the self as possessing the body, he does not see the body as contained within the self, he does not see the self as con tained within the body. He does not see feeling... perception... forma tions... he does not see consciousness as the self, he does not see the self as possessing consciousness, he does not see consciousness as con tained within the self, he does not see the self as contained within con sciousness. This is absence of personality view.

On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the cessation of personality?” The nun Dhammanandā replied: It is the remainderless cutting off of clinging to the body aggregate, its abandonment, disgorging, eradication, nonpollution, cessation, appease- ment, disappearance; it is the remainderless cutting off of clinging to the feeling... perception... formations... consciousness aggregate, its abandonment, disgorging, eradication, nonpollution, cessation, appease- ment, disappearance—this is the cessation of personality.^318 On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further:

Noble one, the aggregates are spoken of as “the aggregates of clinging” or the aggregates are spoken of as “the clinging aggregates.” [Now], is it that the aggregates are the same as the clinging aggregates, and the clinging aggregates are the same as the aggregates? Or is it that the aggregates and the clinging aggregates are different? The nun Dhammanandā replied: It may be that the aggregates are the same as the clinging aggregates, or it may be that the aggregates are not the same as the clinging aggregates. When are the aggregates the same as the clinging aggregates? If with regard to the body there are taints and grasping; if with regard to feeling... per ception... formations... if with regard to consciousness there are taints and grasping, then this is when the aggregates are the same as the clinging aggregates. When are the aggregates not the same as the clinging aggregates? If with regard to the body there are no taints and no grasping; if with regard to feeling... perception... formations... if with regard to consciousness there are no taints and no grasping, then this is when the aggregates are not the same as the clinging aggregates.

On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the noble eightfold path?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “The noble eightfold path is right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. This is the noble eightfold path.” On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, is the noble eightfold path conditioned?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “It is like this, the noble eightfold path is conditioned.” On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, how many groups are there?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “There are three groups: the group of virtue, the group of samādhi, and the group of wisdom.” On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, does the noble eightfold path encompass the three groups, or do the three groups encompass the noble eightfold path?” The nun Dhammanandā replied: The noble eightfold path does not encompass the three groups; the three groups encompass the noble eightfold path. Right speech, right action, and right livelihood—these three path factors are encompassed by the noble group of virtue. Right mindfulness and right samādhi—these two path factors are encompassed by the noble group of samādhi. Right view, right intention, and right effort—these three path factors are encompassed by the noble group of wisdom.^319 Thus the noble eightfold path does not encompass the three groups; [rather] the three groups encom pass the noble eightfold path. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It

is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, is there a counterpart to cessation?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “Cessation has no counterpart.” On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, how many factors does the first absorption have?” The nun Dhammanandā replied: The first absorption has five factors: [directed] awareness, [sustained] contemplation, joy, happiness, and unification of the mind. These are the five factors of the first absorption.^320 On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further:

Noble one, what is samādhi? What is the sign of samādhi? What is the strength of samādhi? What is the achievement of con- centration?^321 What is the cultivation of samādhi? The nun Dhammanandā replied: If the wholesome mind attains unification, this is samādhi. The four establishments of mindfulness are the sign of samādhi. The four right efforts are the strength of samādhi. The four bases of supernormal power are the achievement of samādhi. If one cultivates all of these wholesome states,^322 repeatedly and energetically cultivating them, then this is the cultivation of samādhi. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further:

Noble one, how many are the factors of the living body upon whose

perishing the body will be discarded in a cemetery, insentient like a piece of wood? The nun Dhammanandā replied: There are three factors of the living body upon whose perishing the body will be discarded in a cemetery, insentient like a piece of wood. What are the three? One: vitality, two: heat, and three: consciousness. These are the three factors of the living body on whose perishing the body will be discarded in a cemetery, insentient like a piece of wood. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the difference between one who is dead and one who has attained the samādhi of cessation?”^323 The nun Dhammanandā replied: The vitality of a dead person has completely ceased, his heat has dissi- pated, and his faculties have broken down. The vitality of a monk who has entered the samādhi of cessation has not completely ceased, his heat has not dissipated, and his faculties have not broken down. This is the difference between a dead person and one who has attained the con- centration of cessation. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further:

Noble one, what is the difference between one who has attained the con centration of cessation and one who has attained the samādhi of [nei ther-perception-nor-]nonperception?^324 The nun Dhammanandā replied: [When] a monk enters the samādhi of cessation, perception and knowing cease; [when] he enters the samādhi of [neither-percep tion-nor-]nonperception, perception and knowing do not cease. This is

the difference between one who has attained the samādhi of cessation and one who has attained the samādhi of [neither-perception-nor-] nonperception. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further:

Noble one, what is the difference between one who emerges from the con- centration of cessation and one who emerges from the samādhi of [neither-perception-nor-]nonperception?^325 The nun Dhammanandā replied: When a monk emerges from the samādhi of cessation, he does not think, “I am emerging from the samādhi of cessation.” When a monk emerges from the samādhi of [neither-perception-nor-]nonperception, he thinks, “Do I have perceptions or do I not have perceptions?” This is the difference between one who emerges from the samādhi of ces- sation and one who emerges from the samādhi of [neither-percep- tion-nor-]nonperception. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, when a monk enters the samādhi of cessation, does he think: ‘I am entering the samādhi of cessation’?” The nun Dhammanandā replied: When a monk enters the samādhi of cessation, he does not think, “I am entering the samādhi of cessation.” Instead, it is because he has previously cultivated the mind in this way that it proceeds accordingly. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, when a monk emerges from the samādhi of cessation, does he think: ‘I am emerging from the samādhi of cessation’?”

The nun Dhammanandā replied: When a monk emerges from the samādhi of cessation, he does not think, “I am emerging from the samādhi of cessation.”’ Instead it is because of the body, the six senses, and the life faculty that he emerges from this samādhi. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further:

Noble one, [when] a monk has emerged from the samādhi of cessa- tion, in what does his mind delight? Whither does it tend? Whither does it incline? The nun Dhammanandā replied: [When] a monk has emerged from the samādhi of cessation, his mind delights in seclusion, it tends toward seclusion, it inclines toward seclusion.^326 On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, how many feelings are there?” The nun Dhammanandā replied: There are three feelings: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, and feeling that is neither pleasant nor painful. Because of what do they exist? Because of contact they exist. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is pleasant feeling? What is painful feeling? What is neutral feeling?” The nun Dhammanandā replied:

What arises born of being touched by a pleasant contact and is felt as bodily or mental pleasure and wellness, such feeling is pleasant feeling. What arises born of being touched by a painful contact and is felt as bodily or mental pain and unwellness, such feeling is painful feeling. What arises born of being touched by a neutral contact and is felt as bodily or mental neutrality and neither wellness nor unwellness, such feeling is neutral feeling. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further:

Noble one, as to pleasant feeling, what is pleasant? What is painful? What is its impermanence? What is its danger? What is its underlying tendency? As to painful feeling, what is pleasant? What is painful? What is its imper- manence? What is its danger? What is its underlying tendency? As to neu- tral feeling, what is pleasant? What is painful? What is its impermanence? What is its danger? What is its underlying tendency?^327 The nun Dhammanandā replied: As to pleasant feeling, its arising is pleasant and its persistence is pleasant, its change is painful, its impermanence is the danger, its underlying ten- dency is desire. As to painful feeling, its arising is painful and its persistence is painful, its change is pleasant, its impermanence is the danger, its under- lying tendency is aversion. As to neutral feeling, not knowing it is painful, knowing it is pleasant,^328 its impermanence is [the danger of] change, its underlying tendency is ignorance. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further:

Noble one, do all pleasant feelings have the underlying tendency to desire? Do all painful feelings have the underlying tendency to aversion? Do all neutral feelings have the underlying tendency to ignorance?

The nun Dhammanandā replied: Not all pleasant feelings have the underlying tendency to desire. Not all painful feelings have the underlying tendency to aversion. Not all neutral feelings have the underlying tendency to ignorance. How do pleasant feelings not have the underlying tendency to desire? When secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, with rap- ture and happiness born of seclusion, a monk dwells having attained the first absorption. This is [when] pleasant feelings do not have the underlying tendency to desire. Why is that? Because desire is being abandoned. How do painful feelings not have the underlying tendency to aversion? When, on seeking the joy of supreme liberation, that seeking and aspiration worries one again and again, giving rise to sadness and affliction. This is [when] painful feelings do not have the underlying tendency to aversion. Why is that? Because aversion is being abandoned. How do neutral feelings not have the underlying tendency to ignorance? [When] with the cessation of pleasure and the cessation of pain, and with the earlier cessation of rapture and displeasure, with neither-pain-nor- pleasure, and with purity of mindfulness and equanimity, one dwells having attained the fourth absorption. This is [when] neutral feelings do not have the underlying tendency to ignorance. Why is that? Because ignorance is being abandoned. On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the counterpart to pleasant feeling?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “The counterpart to pleasant feeling is painful feeling.” On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the counterpart to painful feeling?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “The counterpart to painful feeling is pleasant feeling.”

On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the counterpart to pleasant feeling and painful feeling?”^329 The nun Dhammanandā replied, “The counterpart to pleasant feeling and painful feeling is neutral feeling.” On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the counterpart to neutral feeling?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “The counterpart to neutral feeling is ignorance.” On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the counterpart to ignorance?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “The counterpart to ignorance is knowl- edge.” On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the counterpart to knowledge?” The nun Dhammanandā replied, “The counterpart to knowledge is nir- vana.”^330 On hearing this, the female lay disciple Visākhā praised her, saying, “It is well, it is well, noble one!” Having praised her, the female lay disciple Visākhā was delighted and received [that teaching] respectfully. [Then] she asked further, “Noble one, what is the counterpart to nirvana?” The nun Dhammanandā replied: You are wanting to ask about a matter without limit. However, for the matter you are asking about you cannot get to the limit on my side. Nirvana is without counterpart. Nirvana, being without bonds, transcends bonds. It is the complete cessation of bonds. It is that for the sake of which one practices the holy life under the World-honored One.

Then, having heard what the nun Dhammanandā said, the female lay dis ciple Visākhā received it well and retained it well. Having memorized it well, she rose from her seat, paid homage with her head at the feet of the nun Dhammanandā, circumambulated her three times, and left. Then, not long after the female lay disciple Visākhā had left, the nun Dhammanandā approached the Buddha, paid homage with her head at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side.^331 She told the Buddha the whole conversation with the female lay disciple Visākhā. She extended her hands with joined palms toward the Buddha and said: World-honored One, speaking like this and answering like this, have I not misrepresented the World-honored One? Have I spoken what is true? Have I spoken what accords with the Dharma, speaking what is Dharma in accordance with the Dharma? In what accords with the Dharma have I created no contradiction? Is there anything to be criticized, anything to be blamed for? The World-honored One replied: Nun, speaking like this and answering like this you have not misrepresented me. You have spoken what is true. You have spoken what accords with the Dharma, spoken what is Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. In what accords with the Dharma you have not created any contradiction. There is nothing to be criticized or blamed for. Nun, if the female lay disciple Visākhā had come and asked me in these phrases and these words, I would have replied to the female lay disciple Visākhā using this meaning, these phrases, and these words. Nun, as you have explained this meaning, you should remember it like this. Why is that? Because this explanation is the meaning of it. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the nun Dhammanandā and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma210-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN11.17]], [[EA49.5]], [[SN12.57]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN41.6]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA210]]
> ◄  [[ma209-bdk]] 📜  [[ma211-bdk]] ►
