---
sutta_code: "MA22"
sutta_title:
  - "Sappurisa Sutta "
  - "Good Person"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA22]]
> ◄  [[ma21-bdk]] 📜  [[ma23-bdk]] ►

### 22. The Discourse on Perfecting the Precepts

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time, Venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks: If a monk is accomplished in virtue, samādhi, and wisdom, then it is certainly possible that he may, in this life, enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. If he does not attain final knowledge within this life, then with the breaking up of the body at death, he will pass beyond the gods that feed on gross food and be reborn among the mind-made gods. Once he has been reborn there, it is certainly possible that he may enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. At that time, Venerable Udāyin was also present in the assembly. Ven- erable Udāyin responded:

Venerable Sāriputta, if a monk is reborn among the mind-made gods, it is certainly not possible that he may enter and emerge from the con centration of the cessation of perception and feeling. A second and a third time Venerable Sāriputta told the monks: If a monk is accomplished in virtue, samādhi, and wisdom, then it is certainly possible that he may, in this life, enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. If he does not attain final knowledge within this life, then with the breaking up of the body at death, he will pass beyond the gods that feed on gross food and be reborn among the mind-made gods. Once he is reborn there, it is certainly possible that he may enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. And a second and a third time Venerable Udāyin countered: Venerable Sāriputta, if a monk is reborn among the mind-made gods, then it is certainly not possible that he may enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling.

Division X

Thereupon, Venerable Sāriputta thought: “This monk has contradicted what I said three times now, and not a single monk [in this assembly] has com- mended what I said. Perhaps I ought to approach the World-honored One.” Then Venerable Sāriputta approached the Buddha. After paying homage, he sat down to one side. Not long after Venerable Sāriputta had left [the assem- bly that he had been teaching], Venerable Udāyin and the other monks also approached the Buddha. After paying homage, they sat down to one side. In that situation, Venerable Sāriputta again addressed the monks: If a monk is accomplished in virtue, samādhi, and wisdom, then it is certainly possible that he may, in this life, enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. If he does not attain final knowledge within this life, then with the breaking up of the body at death, he will pass beyond the gods that feed on gross food and be reborn among the mind-made gods. Once he is reborn there, it is certainly possible that he may enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. [And just as before,] Venerable Udāyin countered: Venerable Sāriputta, if a monk is reborn among the mind-made gods, then it is certainly not possible that he may enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. A second and a third time Venerable Sāriputta told the monks: If a monk is accomplished in virtue, samādhi, and wisdom, then it is certainly possible that he may, in this life, enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. If he does not attain final knowledge within this life, then with the breaking up of the body at death, he will pass beyond the gods that feed on gross food and be reborn among the mind-made gods. Once he is reborn there, it is certainly possible that he may enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. And a second and a third time Venerable Udāyin countered: Venerable Sāriputta, if a monk is reborn among the mind-made gods,

then it is certainly not possible that he may enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. Then Venerable Sāriputta thought: “[Even] in front of the World-honored One this monk has contradicted what I said three times now, and not a single monk [in this assembly] has commended what I said. I had better remain silent.” Thereupon, the World-honored One asked: “Udāyin, would you say that the mind-made gods have form?” Venerable Udāyin replied: “Yes, World-honored One.” The World-honored One directly rebuked Udāyin: “You are a fool, blind, without vision. On what grounds do you comment on this advanced topic in the Dharma?” Thereupon, Venerable Udāyin, having been directly rebuked by the Buddha, was sad and distressed. He lowered his head in silence, unable to reply, and seemed immersed in thought. After having directly rebuked Venerable Udāyin, the World-honored One addressed Venerable Ānanda:

A most highly regarded and virtuous elder monk has been [improperly] contradicted. For what reason did you show disrespect by not inter- vening? You too are a fool, with no loving-kindness, to turn your back on a most highly regarded and virtuous elder. After having directly rebuked Venerable Udāyin and Venerable Ānanda, the World-honored One addressed the monks:

If a monk is accomplished in virtue, samādhi, and wisdom, then it is certainly possible that he may, in this life, enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. If he does not attain final knowledge within this life, then with the breaking up of the body at death, he will pass beyond the gods that feed on gross food and be reborn among the mind-made gods. Once he is reborn there, it is certainly possible that he may enter and emerge from the samādhi of the cessation of perception and feeling. Having said this, the Buddha entered his meditation hut to meditate in

silence. At that time, Venerable Baijing^98 was in the assembly. Venerable Ānanda spoke to Venerable Baijing:

I have been rebuked for something that another person did. Venerable Baijing, the World-honored One will certainly emerge from his med- itation hut in the late afternoon. He will sit on a prepared seat in front of the assembly of monks and discuss this matter. May Venerable Bai- jing respond regarding this matter! I am much [too] embarrassed and ashamed in front of the World-honored One and our companions in the holy life. Then, in the late afternoon the World-honored One emerged from his meditation hut. He sat on a prepared seat in front of the assembly of monks. He asked: “Baijing, for possessing how many qualities is a senior monk esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life?” Venerable Baijing replied: World-honored One, a senior monk is esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life if he possesses five qualities. What are the five? World-honored One, a senior monk observes the training in the precepts, guards [against breaking] the code of rules, and skillfully controls his comportment in accordance with proper con- duct. He trains in the precepts in this way, seeing great danger in even the slightest transgression and being apprehensive of it. World-honored One, such a morally restrained, elder and highly regarded monk is esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life. Again, World-honored One, a senior monk studies widely and learns much, retaining it and not forgetting it, accumulating wide learn- ing of what is called the Dharma, which is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, which has [proper] meaning and expression, is endowed with purity, and reveals the holy life. In this way he studies widely and learns much regarding all the teachings, familiarizing himself with them even a thousand times, men- tally considering and contemplating them with knowledge, vision, and profound penetration. World-honored One, such a learned, elder and highly regarded monk is esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life.

Again, World-honored One, a senior monk attains the four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present lifetime; he attains them with ease, without difficulty. World-honored One, such a meditative senior monk is esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life. Again, World-honored One, a senior monk develops comprehen sion and wisdom, attains understanding concerning the rise and fall of phenomena, attains noble penetrative knowledge and discriminative understanding concerning the true cessation of suffering. World-honored One, such a wise senior monk is esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life. Again, World-honored One, a senior monk has destroyed all taints, is freed from all fetters, [has attained] liberation of the mind and liberation through wisdom, in that very life, personally attained understanding and awakening, and dwells having personally realized. He knows as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what was to be done has been done. There will not be another existence.” World-honored One, such a taint-free senior monk is esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life. World-honored One, if a senior monk is accomplished in these five qualities, he is esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life. The World-honored One asked: Baijing, if a senior monk does not possess these five qualities, for what [other] reason should he be esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life? Venerable Baijing replied: World-honored One, if a senior monk does not possess these five qual ities, there is no other reason that he should be esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life. Only for his advanced age, hoary hair, lost teeth, deteriorating health, hunched body, unsteady step, over weight body, shortness of breath, reliance on a walking cane, shrinking flesh, sagging skin, wrinkles like pockmarks, failing sense faculties, and unsightly complexion might his companions in the holy life still esteem and revere him.

The World-honored One said: Indeed so! If a senior monk does not possess these five qualities, there is no other reason that he should be esteemed and revered by his companions in the holy life. Only for his advanced age, hoary hair, lost teeth, deteriorating health, hunched back, unsteady step, overweight body, shortness of breath, reliance on a walking cane, shrinking flesh, sagging skin, wrinkles like pockmarks, failing sense faculties, and unsightly complexion might his companions in the holy life still esteem and revere him. Baijing, the monk Sāriputta has attained these five qualities, so all of you should esteem and revere him. Why? Baijing, the monk Sāriputta observes the training in the pre- cepts, guards [against breaking] the code of rules, and skillfully controls his comportment in accordance with proper conduct. He trains in the precepts in this way, seeing great danger in even the slightest trans- gression and being apprehensive of it. Furthermore, Baijing, the monk Sāriputta has studied widely and learned much, retaining it and not forgetting it, accumulating wide learning of what is called the Dharma, which is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, which has [proper] meaning and expression, is endowed with purity, and reveals the holy life. In this way he has studied widely and learned much regarding all the teachings, familiarizing himself with them even a thousand times, mentally considering and contemplating them with knowledge, vision, and profound penetration. Furthermore, Baijing, the monk Sāriputta has attained the four higher states of mind, happy abidings in his present lifetime, he attains them with ease, without difficulty. Furthermore, Baijing, the monk Sāriputta has developed compre- hension and wisdom, has attained understanding concerning the rise and fall of phenomena, has attained noble penetrative knowledge and dis- criminative understanding concerning the true cessation of suffering. Furthermore, Baijing, the monk Sāriputta has destroyed all taints. Freed from all fetters, [he has attained] liberation of the mind and lib- eration through wisdom, in this very life, he has personally attained

understanding and awakening, and dwells having personally realized. He knows as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been estab lished, what was to be done has been done. There will not be another existence.” Baijing, the monk Sāriputta has attained these five qualities, so all of you should esteem and revere him. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Ven erable Baijing and the other monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma22-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M iii 37 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA126]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA22]]
> ◄  [[ma21-bdk]] 📜  [[ma23-bdk]] ►
