---
sutta_code: "MA26"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahāsīhanāda Sutta "
  - "Longer Discourse on the Lion’s Roar"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA26]]
> ◄  [[ma25-bdk]] 📜  [[ma27-bdk]] ►

### 26. The Discourse to Gulissāni

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time, the monk Gulissāni was also staying at Rājagaha. Living in a forest dwelling,^104 Gulissāni [was given to] joking frivolously and bragging about himself. Acting in a restless and agitated manner, he was lacking in mindfulness, and his mind was like a monkey. For some small matter, the monk Gulissāni had gone to Rājagaha. At that time, at midday after having taken their meal, Venerable Sāriputta and an assembly of monks had congregated in the assembly hall over some small matter. Having settled what he had to do at Rājagaha, the monk Gulissāni also went toward the assembly hall. Seeing Gulissāni approaching in the distance, Venerable Sāriputta spoke to the [assembled] monks in relation to Gulissāni:

Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in being respectful and compliant. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, is often disrespectful and not compliant, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, is often disrespectful and not compliant.” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in being respectful and compliant. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in refraining from making frivolous jokes and from behaving in a restless and agitated manner. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, often makes frivolous jokes and behaves in a restless and agitated manner, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable for- est-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing for- est-dwelling, often makes frivolous jokes and behaves in a restless and agitated manner.” When he comes to stay amid the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in refraining from making frivolous jokes and from behaving in a restless and agitated manner. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in refraining from irrelevant talk. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, often engages in irrelevant talk, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, often engages in irrelevant talk.” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the

other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in refraining from irrel evant talk. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in not bragging about himself and not being chatty. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, often brags about himself and often is chatty, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, often brags about himself and often is chatty.” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in not bragging about himself and not being chatty. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in guarding the sense faculties. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, is often with unguarded sense faculties, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, is often with unguarded sense faculties.” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in guarding the sense faculties. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in moderation in eating. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest-dwelling, is greedy in eating and does not know moderation, he will incur other monks’ dis approval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, is greedy in eating and does not know moderation.” When he comes to

stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in moderation in eating. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in being energetic and free from laziness. Ven- erable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, is often slack and lazy, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, is often slack and lazy.” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in being energetic and free from laziness. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in right mindfulness and right attentiveness. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, often lacks right mindfulness and right attentiveness, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, often lacks right mindfulness and right attentiveness.” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, ven- erable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in right mindfulness and right attentiveness. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in knowing the [proper] time and being skillful in regard to time, [for example,] not going into the village to beg for food too early nor returning too late. Venerable friends, if a forest- dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, goes into the village to beg for food too early or returns too late, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say]

this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, goes into the village to beg for food too early or returns too late.” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in knowing the [proper] time and being skillful in regard to time. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in knowing [proper] seats and being skillful in choosing a seat, not taking the seat of a senior monk, or scolding junior monks [for taking the seat he wants]. Venerable friends, if a forest dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, takes the seat of a senior monk or scolds junior monks [for taking the seat he wants], he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, takes the seat of a senior monk or scolds junior monks [for taking the seat he wants].” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in knowing [proper] seats and being skillful in choosing a seat. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in explaining and discussing the code of discipline and the advanced teachings. Why? Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, may encounter people who come with questions regarding the code of discipline and the advanced teachings. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though prac ticing forest dwelling, is unable to answer [questions regarding] the code of discipline and the advanced teachings, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, is unable to answer [questions regarding] the code of discipline and the advanced teachings.” When he comes to stay among the monastic com munity, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticismfrom the other

monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in explaining and discussing the code of discipline and the advanced teachings. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in explaining and discussing the peaceful liber- ations, the attaining of those formless samādhis that transcend form. Why? Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, may encounter people who come with questions regard- ing the peaceful liberations, the attaining of those formless concentra- tions that transcend form. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest dwelling, is unable to answer [questions regard- ing] the peaceful liberations, the attaining of those formless concen- trations that transcend form, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this venerable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, is unable to answer [questions regarding] the peaceful liberations, the attaining of those formless samādhis that transcend form.” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in explaining and discussing the peaceful liberations, the attaining of those formless samādhis that transcend form. Venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in explaining and discussing the higher knowl- edge of the destruction of the taints. Why? Venerable friends, a for- est-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, may encounter people who come with questions regarding the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints. Venerable friends, if a forest-dwelling monk, though practicing forest-dwelling, is unable to answer [questions regarding] the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints, he will incur other monks’ disapproval and criticism: “As for this ven- erable forest-dweller, for the sake of what does he practice forest dwelling? Why [do we say] this? This venerable forest-dweller, though practicing forest dwelling, is unable to answer [questions regarding]

the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints.” When he comes to stay among the monastic community, he will incur [such] disapproval and criticism from the other monks. Therefore, venerable friends, a forest-dwelling monk, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in explaining and discussing the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints. At that time, Venerable Mahā Moggallāna was also present in the assem- bly. Venerable Mahā Moggallāna said:

Venerable Sāriputta, should only forest-dwelling monks, when practicing forest dwelling, train in these things, and not monks [who] stay among people? Venerable Sāriputta replied: Venerable Mahā Moggallāna, forest-dwelling monks, when practicing forest dwelling, should train in these things. How much more so monks who stay among people! In this way, the two venerable ones exchanged ideas and praised each other’s words. Having heard what was said, [the monks in the assembly] rose from their seats and left.

Be respectful, refrain from frivolous jokes, Do not engage in irrelevant talk and bragging, Guard the sense faculties, be moderate in eating, Be energetic and have right mindfulness and attentiveness, Know the time and [know] proper seating, Discuss the code of discipline and the advanced teachings, Explain the peaceful liberations, And the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma26-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M i 68 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA26]]
> ◄  [[ma25-bdk]] 📜  [[ma27-bdk]] ►
