---
sutta_code: "MA28"
sutta_title:
  - "Cūḷasuññata Sutta "
  - "Emptiness Shorter Discourse"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA28]]
> ◄  [[ma27-bdk]] 📜  [[ma29-bdk]] ►

### 28. The Discourse on Teaching the Ill [Anāthapiṇḍika]

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika was gravely ill. Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika spoke to a certain messenger: Go to the Buddha and, on my behalf, pay homage at his feet. Inquire about his well-being, asking: “World-honored One, are you healthy

and strong? Are you comfortable and free from ailments? Are you dwelling at ease, and is your vigor as usual?” Then inform him: “The householder Anāthapiṇḍika pays homage at the World-honored One’s feet. He inquires about your well-being [with the words]: ‘World-hon- ored One, are you healthy and strong? Are you comfortable and free from ailments? Are you dwelling at ease, and is your vigor as usual?’” After you have, on my behalf, made these inquiries of the Buddha, go to Venerable Sāriputta. Pay homage at his feet on my behalf, and inquire about his well-being by asking: “Venerable one, are you healthy and strong? Are you comfortable and free from ailments? Are you dwelling at ease, and is your vigor as usual?” Then inform him: “The householder Anāthapiṇḍika pays homage at the feet of Venerable Sāriputta. He inquires about the venerable one’s well-being [with the words]: ‘Are you healthy and strong? Are you comfortable and free from ailments? Are you dwelling at ease, and is your vigor as usual?’” [Then also tell him:] “Venerable Sāriputta, the householder Anātha - piṇḍika is gravely ill and in a critical condition. The householder Anātha - piṇḍika deeply wishes to see Venerable Sāriputta. But in his deteriorating physical condition, he is too weak to come and visit Venerable Sāriputta. It would be good if Venerable Sāriputta, out of compassion, were to visit the householder Anāthapiṇḍika at his house.” Then, having received the householder Anāthapiṇḍika’s order, the mes- senger approached the Buddha. Having paid homage at his feet, he sat down to one side and said:

World-honored One, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika pays homage at your feet. He inquires about your well-being: “World-honored One, are you healthy and strong? Are you comfortable and free from ail ments? Are you dwelling at ease, and is your vigor as usual?” Then the World-honored One said to the messenger: May the householder Anāthapiṇḍika find well-being and happiness. May all gods, human beings, asura s, celestial musicians, demons, and all other forms of life find well-being and happiness!

The messenger heard what the Buddha said, and remembered it well. Then, having paid homage at the Buddha’s feet and circumambulated him three times, he approached Venerable Sāriputta. Having paid homage at his feet, he sat down to one side and said: Venerable Sāriputta, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika pays homage at Venerable Sāriputta’s feet. He inquires about your well-being: “Ven erable one, are you healthy and strong? Are you comfortable and free from ailments? Are you dwelling at ease, and is your vigor as usual?” [Also] “Venerable Sāriputta, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika is gravely ill and is in a critical condition. The householder Anāthapiṇḍika deeply wishes to see Venerable Sāriputta. But in his poor physical condition, he is too weak to visit Venerable Sāriputta. It would be good if Venerable Sāriputta, out of compassion, were to visit the householder Anāthapiṇḍika at his house.” Venerable Sāriputta consented by remaining silent. Then, understanding that Venerable Sāriputta had consented by remaining silent, the messenger rose from his seat, paid homage at [Sāriputta’s] feet, circumambulated him three times, and departed. When the night was over, at dawn, Venerable Sāriputta put on his robe, took his bowl, and approached the householder Anāthapiṇḍika’s house. Seeing Venerable Sāriputta approaching in the distance, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika struggled to raise himself from his bed. Seeing the householder Anāthapiṇḍika struggling to raise himself from the bed, Venerable Sāriputta stopped him, saying: “Lie still, householder! Don’t get up! There is another bed here. I shall sit on it.” Then, having seated himself on the other bed, Venerable Sāriputta asked: “How is your ailment now, householder? How much are you eating and drinking? Are your painful feelings subsiding, not increasing?” The householder replied: “My ailment is becoming critical. I cannot eat or drink. My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding.” Venerable Sāriputta said: Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who are lacking in faith, with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn

in hell. But you, householder, are not lacking in faith nowadays; rather, you are of superior faith. And by [recalling your] superior faith, house- holder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to hap- piness. By [recalling your] superior faith, householder, you may attain the fruit of once-returning or [even] the fruit of non-returning, as you have already attained stream-entry. Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid, householder. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who lack virtue, with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. But you, householder, do not lack virtue; rather, you are strong in virtue. And by [recalling your] strong virtue, house- holder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to hap- piness. By [recalling your] strong virtue, householder, you may attain the fruit of once-returning or [even] the fruit of non-returning, as you have already attained stream-entry. Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid, householder. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who have not learned much [about the Dharma], with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. But you, house- holder, are not one who has not learned much [about the Dharma]; rather, you are learned [regarding the Dharma]. And by [recalling your] great learning [in the Dharma], householder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to happiness. By [recalling your] great learning, householder, you may attain the fruit of once-returning or [even] the fruit of non-returning, as you have already attained stream-entry. Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid, householder. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who are miserly and covetous, with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. But you, householder, are not miserly or covetous; rather, you are a generous donor. And by [recalling your] generosity as a donor, householder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to happiness. By [recalling your] generosity as a donor, householder, you may attain the fruit of once-returning or [even] the fruit of non-returning, as you have already attained stream- entry.

Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid, householder. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who have faulty wis dom, with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. But you, householder, do not have faulty wisdom; rather, you are endowed with wholesome wisdom. And by [recalling your] wholesome wisdom, householder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to happiness. By [recalling your] wholesome wisdom, householder, you may attain the fruit of once returning or [even] the fruit of non-returning, as you have already attained stream-entry. Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid, householder. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who have wrong view, with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. But you, householder, do not have wrong view; rather, you have right view. And by [recalling your] right view, householder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to happiness. By [recalling your] right view, householder, you may attain the fruit of once-returning or [even] the fruit of non-returning, as you have already attained stream-entry. Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid, householder. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who have wrong inten tion, with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. But you, householder, do not have wrong intention; rather, you have right intention. And by [recalling your] right intention, householder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to happiness. By [recalling your] right intention, householder, you may attain the fruit of once-returning or [even] the fruit of non-returning, as you have already attained stream-entry. Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid, householder. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who have wrong understanding, with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. But you, householder, do not have wrong understanding; rather, you have right understanding. And by [recalling your] right understanding, householder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to happiness. By [recalling

your] right understanding, householder, you may attain the fruit of once-returning or [even] the fruit of non-returning, as you have already attained stream-entry. Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid, householder. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who have the wrong [kind of] liberation, with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. But you, householder, do not have the wrong [kind of] liberation; rather, you have [the first stage of] the right [kind of] liberation. And by [recalling your] right liberation, householder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to happiness. By [recalling your] right liberation, householder, you may attain the fruit of once-returning or [even] the fruit of non- returning, as you have already attained stream-entry. Don’t be afraid, householder. Don’t be afraid, householder. Why not? In the case of ignorant, ordinary worldlings who have wrong atten- tiveness, with the breaking up of the body at death they go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. But you, householder, do not have wrong attentiveness; rather, you have right attentiveness. And by [recalling your] right attentiveness, householder, you may be able to extinguish your pain and give rise to happiness. By [recalling your] right attentiveness, householder, you may attain the fruit of once-return- ing or [even] the fruit of non-returning, as you have already attained stream-entry. Thereupon, the householder’s illness vanished and his condition returned to normal. He raised himself into a sitting position on the bed, and praised Venerable Sāriputta:

Very good! Very good! Your teaching of the Dharma to this sick man was marvelous, very special! Venerable Sāriputta, on hearing your Dharma teaching for a sick man, my pain has been extinguished and happiness has been aroused. Venerable Sāriputta, my illness has now vanished and my condition has returned to normal. Venerable Sāriputta, once, in the past, being in Rājagaha for some business or other, I stayed in the home of a householder there. At that time that householder was preparing to provide a meal for the Buddha

and the community of monks on the following day. When the night was far-gone and dawn was approaching, the householder called his children, grandchildren, servants, and retainers, saying: “Get up! Quick! We must all prepare the meal.” Each received his or her instructions and together they set up the kitchen and began preparing all sorts of nourishing and delicious food and drinks. The householder personally set up a raised seat [for the Buddha], decorating it with countless adornments. Venerable Sāriputta, on seeing this, I thought: “Is the householder preparing for a wedding? Is it to be a reception for a new daughter-in law? Or has the king been invited? Or some senior minister? Or is it for a great ritual offering of food?” Venerable Sāriputta, having pondered in this way, I asked the householder, “Are you preparing for a wedding? Is it to be a reception for a new daughter-in-law? Or has the king been invited? Or some senior minister? Or is it for a great ritual offering of food?” The householder replied: “We are not preparing for a wedding. It is not to be a reception for a new daughter-in-law. Neither has the king been invited, nor some senior minister. But it is indeed for a great ritual offering of food. We are providing a meal for the Buddha and the com munity of monks this coming day.” Venerable Sāriputta, until then I had not heard the word “Buddha.” When I heard it, my bodily hair stood on end. So I inquired: “House holder, you spoke of ‘the Buddha.’ Who is it that is called ‘the Buddha’?” Then the householder replied: “Have you not heard? There is a son of the Sakya clan who has relinquished his Sakyan family ties. He shaved off his hair and beard, donned yellow robe and, out of faith, gave up the household life and became a homeless one, to train in the path. He attained perfect, supreme awakening; hence he is called ‘Buddha’ [Awakened One].” I asked him further: “You also mentioned ‘the community.’ What is this community?” The householder again replied: “Members of various families and clans have [also] shaved off their hair and beards, donned the yel low robe and, out of faith, given up the household life and become

homeless ones, to train in the Buddha’s path. These [monks] constitute his community. It is this Buddha and his community that we have invited.” Venerable Sāriputta, I again asked the householder: “Where is the World-honored One dwelling now? I desire to go and visit him.” The householder replied: “The World-honored One is presently dwelling at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. You can go there if you wish.” Venerable Sāriputta, I thought: “It will soon be daybreak. Let me quickly go and see the Buddha.” Venerable Sāriputta, my desire to go and see the Buddha being so pressing, although it was still night I sud- denly had a perception of daytime brightness. So I set out from the householder’s home and went to the town gate. At that time, the town gate was guarded by two watchmen. One of the watchmen stood guard during the first half of the night, permitting people to enter without hindrance. The other stood guard during the second half of the night, permitting people to leave without hindrance. Venerable Sāriputta, I thought: “The night is not yet over. Why? [Because] the town gate is [still being] guarded by [one of the] two watchmen. One of the watchmen stands guard during the first half of the night, permitting people to enter without hindrance. The other stands guard during the second half of the night, permitting people to leave without hindrance.” Venerable Sāriputta, not long after I had passed out through the town gate, the [perception of daytime] brightness suddenly vanished and everything was dark again. Venerable Sāriputta, at that time I became afraid and my bodily hair stood on end. [I thought]: “May no man or invisible being harm me!” At that moment, a divine being at the city gate radiated forth a great radiance reaching from Rājagaha up to the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. [That divine being] came and addressed me:

Don’t be afraid, householder! Don’t be afraid, householder! Why not? In a previous life I was a friend of yours, named Honey Vessel.^110 We were very dear and close to each other in our youth.

Householder, in the past I had visited Venerable Mahā Moggallāna. Having paid homage at his feet, I sat to one side. Venerable Mahā Moggallāna gave me a teaching. He exhorted, encouraged, and delighted me, and by countless skillful means explained the Dharma to me. Having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted me, he let me take the three refuges and the five precepts. Householder, for having taken the three refuges and kept the five precepts, with the breaking up of the body at death I was reborn in the heaven of the four great kings, and now reside at this town gate. Go quickly, householder! Go quickly, householder! It is better to go than to stay here. To urge me onward, that divine being uttered the following verses: Acquisition of a hundred horses, ministers, and women, And of a hundred carts filled with gems Is not equal to one-sixteenth [of the worth] Of one step toward visiting the Buddha. Even a hundred excellent white elephants, With gold and silver saddles, Are not equal to one-sixteenth [of the worth] Of one step toward visiting the Buddha. A hundred beautiful women, Their bodies adorned with jewels and flowers, Are not equal to one-sixteenth [of the worth] Of one step toward visiting the Buddha. The supremely precious woman treasure, Adored by the wheel-turning monarch, Is not equal to one-sixteenth [of the worth] Of one step toward visiting the Buddha. Having uttered these verses, the divine being urged me further, saying: “Go quickly, householder! Go quickly, householder! It is better to go than to stay here.”

Venerable Sāriputta, I thought: “The Buddha is worthy of vener- ation, and the Dharma and the community of monks are worthy of ven- eration. Why? Even a divine being wishes me to go and visit them.” Venerable Sāriputta, aided by the [divine being’s] radiance, I reached the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time, the night being over, toward dawn, the World-honored One had emerged from his meditation hut and was practicing walking meditation in the open, waiting for me. Venerable Sāriputta, in the distance I saw the Buddha’s fine appearance, outstandingly radiant like a resplendent moon amidst the stars, dazzling like a golden mountain, endowed with the features [of a Great Person], majestic and imposing. His senses were tranquil and without obstruction, skillfully tamed and restrained, his mind tranquil and still. Seeing the Buddha, I was overjoyed and approached him. Having paid homage at his feet, I followed the Buddha in walking meditation. In accordance with the custom of householders, I greeted him with this verse:

Has the World-honored One slept peacefully, Having fallen asleep quickly?

[He replied:]

Like a [true] “brahmin,” I have attained deliverance, Untainted by desires, Having relinquished all yearning, I have attained peace, With all fevers of the mind removed. [Consequently] I have slept well and happily.

Then, the World-honored One, having reached the end of the walking path, sat cross-legged on a prepared sitting mat. Venerable Sāriputta, I [again] paid homage at his feet, and sat to one side. [Then] the World- honored One taught me the Dharma, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting me, employing countless skillful means to explain it. He exhorted, inspired, and delighted me as he delivered the teaching of all the buddhas.

First he taught the beautiful Dharma that uplifts those who hear it, speaking on generosity, on virtue, on ways to rebirth in heavenly realms, on repudiating desire as dangerous, and on the round of rebirth as repugnant. He praised desirelessness as a factor of the sublime path, and as purity. After expounding these teachings to me, the World-hon ored One knew that my mind was joyous, that it had become contented, pliant, patient, uplifted, collected, free from doubt, free from hin drances, possessing the ability and strength to receive the true Dharma— that is to say, the cardinal principles of the teachings of all the Buddhas. The World-honored One taught me about suffering, its arising, its cessation, and the path [leading to its cessation]. As I sat there, Venerable Sāriputta, I saw the four noble truths: suffering, its arising, its cessation, and the path. Just as a white cloth easily absorbs dye, so did I [absorb the teaching]. As I sat there, I saw the four noble truths: suffering, its arising, its cessation, and the path. Venerable Sāriputta, [in this way] I saw the Dharma, attained the Dharma, awakened to the pure Dharma. Doubt was eradicated; confusion [concerning the Dharma] was transcended. I would venerate no other [teachers], never again follow others. I was without uncertainty, being established in realization of the fruit [of stream-entry]. In regard to the teachings of the World-honored One I attained freedom from vacillation. Then I rose from my seat, paid homage to the Buddha, [and said]: World-honored One, henceforth I take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of monks. May the World-honored One accept me as a lay follower. From today onward I take refuge for my whole life, until I die. Then, Venerable Sāriputta, I placed my palms together and said: “World honored One, allow me to invite you and an assembly of monks to spend the rains retreat at Sāvatthī.” Then the Buddha asked me: “What is your name? How do the people of Sāvatthī address you?” I replied: “My name is Sudatta; but because I regularly assist and give to the needy and the orphaned, the people of Sāvatthī call me Anāthapiṇḍika [Giver to the Needy and the Orphaned].”

Then, the World-honored One asked me further: “Are there dwellings [for monks] at Sāvatthī?” I replied: “There are [at present] no dwellings [for monks] at Sāvatthī.” Then the World-honored One said: “Know, householder, that if there were dwellings [for them], monks would be able to visit and stay at [Sāvatthī].” I then responded: “Indeed, World-honored One. I will have dwellings erected, so that monks can visit and stay at Sāvatthī. May the World- honored One appoint someone to assist me!” And the World-honored One appointed and sent [you], Venerable Sāriputta, to assist me. Then, having heard what the Buddha said and kept it well in mind, I rose from my seat, paid homage to the Buddha, and, having circum- ambulated him three times, departed. Having completed what I had to do at Rājagaha, I set out for Sāvatthī, together with Venerable Sāriputta. Without entering [the town of] Sāvatthī or returning to my home, we proceeded right away [to examine] the lands outside the city, [looking for] a location that had good access; that was not noisy in the daytime and was peaceful at night; that was without mosquitoes, gadflies, flies, and fleas; and that was neither too cold nor too hot; [where] one could erect dwellings for the Buddha and his community. Venerable Sāriputta, at that time we saw that Prince Jeta’s Grove was the only [location] that had good access; that was not noisy in the daytime and was peaceful at night; that was without mosquitoes, gad- flies, flies, and fleas; and that was neither too cold nor too hot. Having seen this, I thought: “This is just the place where dwellings for the Buddha and his community can be erected.” Then, Venerable Sāriputta, I entered Sāvatthī. Still without return- ing home, I first approached Prince Jeta, saying: “Prince, will you sell me this grove?” The prince replied: “Know this, elder!^111 I will not sell the grove.” A second and a third time I repeated my request: “Prince, will you sell me this grove?” And a second and a third time the prince replied: “I will not sell the grove, not even if you pay me millions and millions [of gold pieces, enough] to cover the entire sur- face [of the grove].”

I replied: “Prince, you have just set the price! I shall go and bring the gold.” Then, Venerable Sāriputta, the prince and I argued about whether or not he had set the price, and finally we approached the chief magistrate in Sāvatthī to settle the matter. The chief magistrate in Sāvatthī said to Prince Jeta: “Prince, you have set the price. Now accept the gold!” Then, Venerable Sāriputta, I returned to my home in Sāvatthī to fetch the cash. Elephants, horses, and carts were employed to transport it. Then the millions and millions of gold pieces were taken out [and used] to cover the ground [of the grove]. But a small portion of the ground was not covered. Venerable Sāriputta, I thought: “From which of my other treasuries, one that is neither too large nor too small, should I take, so that the remaining portion can be covered?” Then Prince Jeta said to me: “Elder, if you have regrets, you can take back the payment and I shall keep the grove.” I said to the prince: “I certainly have no regrets. I was merely thinking: From which of my other treasuries, one that is neither too large nor too small, should I take so that the remaining portion can be covered?” Then Prince Jeta thought: “The Buddha must be most worthy of veneration, and the Dharma and the community of monks must also be most worthy of veneration. Why? [Because they] have moved this elder to make such a great offering, to spend his wealth in such a way. I would now rather construct an enclosure with a gate on this [remaining piece of] ground and offer it to the Buddha and his community.” Then Prince Jeta said to me: “Enough, elder! Don’t bring any more gold to cover this [remaining] piece of ground. I shall construct an enclo sure with a gate here and offer it to the Buddha and his community.” Venerable Sāriputta, out of compassion I gave this piece of ground to Prince Jeta. Venerable Sāriputta, in that very summer, I constructed [in the grove] sixteen large dwelling places and sixty storerooms. Ven erable Sāriputta assisted me during that time. [As for the present,] the Dharma talk that Venerable Sāriputta gave for this sick man was marvelous, very special. Having heard this

Dharma talk delivered for a sick man, I am cured of that severe illness, and am happy. Venerable Sāriputta, I have now recovered from my ill- ness, and found peace and comfort. Venerable Sāriputta, accept a meal [from me]! Venerable Sāriputta consented by remaining silent. The householder [Anāthapiṇḍika], having understood that Venerable Sāriputta had consented by remaining silent, rose from his seat, personally [brought] water for washing [his hands], and offered various kinds of fine dishes, delicious, plentiful, and easy to digest. After the meal, he again brought the water container, and then seated himself on a small seat to one side to listen to the Dharma. Once Anāthapiṇḍika was seated, Venerable Sāriputta expounded the Dharma to him, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting him, using countless skillful means to explain the Dharma. Having exhorted, inspired, and delighted [Anāthapiṇḍika], [Sāriputta] rose from his seat and departed. At that time, the World-honored One was giving teachings, surrounded by an immense following. Seeing Venerable Sāriputta approaching in the distance, the World-honored One told the monks [in the assembly]:

The monk Sāriputta is endowed with bright wisdom, quick wisdom, lively wisdom, keen wisdom, extensive wisdom, profound wisdom, wisdom that brings release, penetrative wisdom, eloquent wisdom. The monk Sāriputta has achieved genuine wisdom. Why [do I say this]? Regarding the four limbs of stream-entry taught in brief by me, the monk Sāriputta has elaborated on them with ten different explanations for the householder Anāthapiṇḍika. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma28-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA51.8]], [[SA1032]], [[SA2.186]], [[SA2.187]], [[SA592]], [[SA593]] | M iii 104 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN148]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA28]]
> ◄  [[ma27-bdk]] 📜  [[ma29-bdk]] ►
