---
sutta_code: "MA29"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahāsuññata Sutta "
  - "Longer Discourse on Emptiness"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA29]]
> ◄  [[ma28-bdk]] 📜  [[ma30-bdk]] ►

### 29. The Discourse by Mahā Koṭṭhita

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time, in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta rose from sitting in meditation and approached Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita. Having exchanged courteous greetings, he sat down to one side.

Venerable Sāriputta said to Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita: “I would like to ask you some questions. Would you care to hear them?” Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita replied: “Venerable Sāriputta, ask whatever you wish. Having heard [your questions], I will [carefully] consider them.” Venerable Sāriputta then asked: Venerable friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there a condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows the unwholesome and knows the roots of the unwholesome. What is knowledge of the unwholesome? It is this: evil bodily actions are unwholesome, evil verbal actions and evil mental actions are unwholesome. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the unwholesome. What is knowledge of the roots of the unwholesome? It is this: greed is a root of the unwholesome; hatred and ignorance are roots of the unwholesome. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the roots of the unwholesome. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows the unwholesome and the roots of the unwholesome, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [con fidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows the wholesome and knows the roots of the wholesome.

What is knowledge of the wholesome? It is this: good bodily actions are wholesome, good verbal actions and good mental actions are wholesome. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the wholesome. What is knowledge of the roots of the wholesome? It is this: absence of lust is a root of the wholesome; absence of aversion and absence of ignorance are roots of the wholesome. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows the wholesome and knows their roots, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view, and, having attained unwa- vering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows nutriment as it really is, knows the arising of nutriment, knows the cessation of nutri- ment, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of nutriment as it really is. What is knowledge of nutriment as it really is? It is this: there are four nutriments: the first nutriment is physical food, coarse or fine; the second nutriment is contact; the third nutriment is intention; and the fourth nutriment is consciousness. This is reckoned to be knowledge of nutriment as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of nutriment as it really is? It is this: in dependence on craving, nutriment comes to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of nutriment as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of nutriment as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of craving, nutriment also ceases. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of nutriment as it really is.

What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of nutri- ment as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of nutriment as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows nutriment as it really is, knows the arising of nutriment, knows the ces- sation of nutriment, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of nutriment as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accom- plished view, acquired right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows the taints as they really are, knows the arising of the taints, knows the cessation of the taints, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of the taints as it really is. What is knowledge of the taints as they really are? There are said to be three taints: the taint of sensual desires, the taint of the process of existence, and the taint of ignorance. This is reckoned to be knowl- edge of the taints as they really are. What is knowledge of the arising of the taints as it really is? It is this: in dependence on ignorance, the taints come to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of taints as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of the taints as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of ignorance, the taints also cease. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of taints as it really is.

What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of the taints as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of the taints as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows the taints as they really are, knows the arising of the taints, knows the cessation of the taints, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of the taints as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accom- plished view, acquired right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows suffering as it really is, knows the arising of suffering, knows the cessation of suffering, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of suffering as it really is. What is knowledge of suffering as it really is? It is this: birth is suffering, old age is suffering, disease is suffering, death is suffering, association with what is disliked is suffering, separation from what is loved is suffering, being unable to get what one wishes is suffering, in short, the five aggregates affected by clinging are suffering. This is reckoned to be knowledge of suffering as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of suffering as it really is? It is this: dependent on old age and death, suffering comes to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of suffering as it really is.

What is knowledge of the cessation of suffering as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of old age and death, suffering also ceases. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of suffering as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of suf- fering as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of suffering as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows suffering as it really is, knows the arising of suffering, knows the ces- sation of suffering, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of suffering as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accom- plished view, acquired right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma.” On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows old age and death as they really are, knows the arising of old age and death, knows the cessation of old age and death, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of old age and death as it really is. What is knowledge of old age as it really is? It is this: old age brings hoary hair, lost teeth, deteriorating health, hunched body, unsteady step, overweight body, shortness of breath, reliance on a walking cane, shrinking flesh, sagging skin, wrinkles like pockmarks, failing sense faculties, and unsightly complexion. This is reckoned to be old age. What is knowledge of death? It is this: all living beings, in their

various forms, are subject to the ending of life, the impermanence, death, dissolution, extinction and breaking up of their life, the stopping of their vital force. This is reckoned to be death. This is the explanation of death and it, along with the explanation of old age that I gave just before, is what is meant by old age and death. This is reckoned to be knowledge of old age and death as they really are. What is knowledge of the arising of old age and death as it really is? It is this: dependent on birth, old age and death come into being. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of old age and death as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of old age and death as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of birth, old age and death also cease. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of old age and death as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of old age and death as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of old age and death as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows old age and death as they really are, knows the arising of old age and death, knows the cessation of old age and death, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of old age and death as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma?

[Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows birth as it really is, knows the arising of birth, knows the cessation of birth, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of birth as it really is. What is knowledge of birth as it really is? It is this: all living beings, in their various forms, experience birth when they are born, when they arise, when they are formed, when the five aggregates come into being, and when the vital faculties are developed. This is reckoned to be knowledge of birth as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of birth as it really is? It is this: dependent on the process of existence, birth comes to be. This is reck- oned to be knowledge of the arising of birth as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of birth as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of the process of existence, birth also ceases. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of birth as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of birth as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of birth as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows birth as it really is, knows the arising of birth, knows the cessation of birth, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of birth as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma?

[Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows the process of existence as it really is, knows the arising of the process of existence, knows the cessation of the process of existence, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of the process of existence as it really is. What is knowledge of the process of existence as it really is? It is this: there are three kinds of process of existence: the process of exis- tence in the sensual [realm], the process of existence in the form [realm], and the process of existence in the formless [realm]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the process of existence as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of the process of existence as it really is? It is this: dependent on clinging, the process of existence comes to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of the process of existence as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of the process of existence as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of clinging, the process of exis- tence also ceases. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of the process of existence as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of the process of existence as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of the process of existence as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows the process of existence as it really is, knows the arising of the process of existence, knows the cessation of the process of existence, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of the process of existence as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well.

Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows clinging as it really is, knows the arising of clinging, knows the cessation of clinging, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of clinging as it really is. What is knowledge of clinging as it really is? It is this: there are four kinds of clinging: clinging to sensual desires, clinging to precepts, clinging to views, and clinging to a self. This is reckoned to be knowl- edge of clinging as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of clinging as it really is? It is this: dependent on craving, clinging comes to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of clinging as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of clinging as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of craving, clinging also ceases. This is reck- oned to be knowledge of the cessation of clinging as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of clinging as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of clinging as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows clinging as it really is, knows the arising of clinging, knows the cessation of clinging, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of clinging as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well.

Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows craving as it really is, knows the arising of craving, knows the cessation of craving, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of craving as it really is. What is knowledge of craving as it really is? It is this: there are three kinds of craving: craving [related to] the sensual [realm], craving [related to] the form [realm], and craving [related to] the formless [realm]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of craving as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of craving as it really is? It is this: dependent on feeling, craving comes to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of craving as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of craving as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of feeling, craving also ceases. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of craving as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of craving as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of craving as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows craving as it really is, knows the arising of craving, knows the cessation of craving, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of craving as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further:

Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows feeling as it really is, knows the arising of feeling, knows the cessation of feeling, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of feeling as it really is. What is knowledge of feeling as it really is? It is this: there are three kinds of feeling: pleasant feelings, unpleasant feelings, and nei- ther-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feelings. This is reckoned to be knowledge of feeling as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of feeling as it really is? It is this: dependent on contact, feelings come to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of feeling as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of feeling as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of contact, feelings also cease. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of feeling as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of feeling as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of feeling as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows feeling as it really is, knows the arising of feeling, knows the cessation of feeling, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of feeling as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further:

Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows contact as it really is, knows the arising of contact, knows the cessation of contact, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of contact as it really is. What is knowledge of contact as it really is? It is this: there are three kinds of contact: pleasant contact, unpleasant contact, and nei- ther-unpleasant-nor-pleasant contact. This is reckoned to be knowledge of contact as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of contact as it really is? It is this: dependent on the six sense bases, contact comes to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of contact as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of contact as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of the six sense bases, contact also ceases. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of contact as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of contact as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of contact as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows contact as it really is, knows the arising of contact, knows the cessation of contact, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of contact as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view, and, having arrived at the true Dharma, has attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further:

Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows the six sense bases as they really are, knows the arising of the six sense bases, knows the cessation of the six sense bases, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of the six sense bases as it really is. What is knowledge of the six sense bases as they really are? It is this: [there is] the sense base of the eye, of the ear, of the nose, of the tongue, of the body, and the sense base of the mind. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the six sense bases as they really are. What is knowledge of the arising of the six sense bases as it really is? It is this: dependent on name-and-form, the six sense bases come to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of the six sense bases as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of the six sense bases as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of name-and-form, the six sense bases also cease. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of the six sense bases as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of the six sense bases as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—[eight factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of the six sense bases as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows the six sense bases as they really are, knows the arising of the six sense bases, knows the cessation of the six sense bases, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of the six sense bases as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma.

On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows name-and-form as it really is, knows the arising of name-and-form, knows the cessation of name-and-form, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of name-and-form as it really is. What is knowledge of name? It is this: name consists of the four incorporeal aggregates [among the five aggregates]. What is knowledge of form? It is this: form consists of the four great elements and of what is derived from the four great elements. This is the explanation of form, and it along with the explanation of name that I gave just before, is [what is meant by] name-and-form. This is reckoned to be knowledge of name-and-form as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of name-and-form as it really is? It is this: dependent on consciousness, name-and-form comes to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of name-and-form as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of name-and-form as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of consciousness, name-and-form also ceases. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of name- and-form as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of name- and-form as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of name-and-form as it really is.

Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows name-and-form as it really is, knows the arising of name-and-form, knows the cessation of name-and-form, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of name-and-form as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows consciousness as it really is, knows the arising of consciousness, knows the cessation of consciousness, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of con- sciousness as it really is. What is knowledge of consciousness as it really is? It is this: there are six types of consciousness: eye consciousness, ear [consciousness], nose [consciousness], tongue [consciousness], body [consciousness], and mind consciousness. This is reckoned to be knowledge of con- sciousness as it really is. What is knowledge of the arising of consciousness as it really is? It is this: dependent on formations, consciousness comes to be. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the arising of consciousness as it really is. What is knowledge of the cessation of consciousness as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of formations, consciousness also ceases. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of consciousness as it really is.

What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of con- sciousness as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of consciousness as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows consciousness as it really is, knows the arising of consciousness, knows the cessation of consciousness, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of consciousness as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, is there yet another condition owing to which a monk accomplishes view, acquires right view, and, having attained unwavering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, arrives at the true Dharma? [Mahā Koṭṭhita] replied: There is, Venerable Sāriputta. It is this: a monk knows formations as they really are, knows the arising of formations, knows the cessation of formations, and knows the path [leading to] the cessation of forma- tions as it really is. What is knowledge of formations as they really are? It is this: there are three kinds of formations: bodily formations, verbal formations, and mental formations. This is reckoned to be knowledge of formations as they really are. What is knowledge of the arising of formations as they really are? It is this: dependent on ignorance, formations come to be. This is reck- oned to be knowledge of the arising of formations as it really is.

What is knowledge of the cessation of formations as it really is? It is this: with the cessation of ignorance, formations also cease. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the cessation of formations as it really is. What is knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of for- mations as it really is? It is this: the noble eightfold path, from right view to right samādhi—eight [factors]. This is reckoned to be knowledge of the path [leading to] the cessation of formations as it really is. Venerable Sāriputta, if there is a monk who, in this manner, knows formations as they really are, knows the arising of formations, knows the cessation of formations, and knows the path [leading to] the ces- sation of formations as it really is, then he is said to be a monk who has accomplished view, acquired right view, and, having attained unwa- vering pure [confidence] in the Dharma, has arrived at the true Dharma. On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having done so, Venerable Sāriputta was delighted and remembered it well. Venerable Sāriputta then asked further: “Friend Mahā Koṭṭhita, when a monk has caused ignorance to cease and knowledge to arise, what further does he need to do?” Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita replied: “Venerable Sāriputta, when a monk has caused ignorance to cease and knowledge to arise, there is nothing further that he needs to do.” On hearing this, Venerable Sāriputta spoke in praise: “Very good! Very good, friend Mahā Koṭṭhita!” Having discussed the meaning [of the Dharma] in this manner, those two venerable ones were both delighted and [would] remember [this exchange] well; they rose from their seats and departed.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma29-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA344]] | M iii 109 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.94]], [[MA30]], [[MN117]], [[MN141]], [[MN61]], [[SN12.11]], [[SN12.12]], [[SN12.15]], [[SN12.63]], [[SN12.64]], [[SN3.12]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA29]]
> ◄  [[ma28-bdk]] 📜  [[ma30-bdk]] ►
