---
sutta_code: "MA3"
sutta_title:
  - "Acchariyaabbhuta Sutta "
  - "Incredible and Amazing"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA3]]
> ◄  [[ma2-bdk]] 📜  [[ma4-bdk]] ►

### 3. The Discourse with the Parable of the Border Town

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks:

If a king’s border town is equipped with seven things and obtains easily and without difficulty an abundance of four types of supplies, then this king’s [border] town will not be wiped out by outside enemies but only by internal self-destruction. What are the seven things with which the king’s [border] town is equipped? In the king’s border town a watchtower has been constructed, built firmly in the earth, indestructible, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the first thing with which the king’s [border] town is equipped. Again, for the king’s border town a moat has been excavated, very deep and wide, well designed and reliable, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the second thing with which the king’s [border] town is equipped. Again, the king’s border town is surrounded by a road that is open and clear, level and wide, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the third thing with which the king’s [border] town is equipped. Again, the king’s border town has raised an army with the four divisions—elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry—to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the fourth thing with which the king’s [border] town is equipped. Again, the king’s border town has been provided with weapons— bows and arrows, swords and spears—to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the fifth thing with which the king’s [border] town is equipped. Again, in the king’s border town a general has been appointed as gatekeeper, one who is sharp-witted and wise in making decisions, brave and resolute, of excellent counsel, who allows entry to the good and keeps out the bad, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the sixth thing with which the king’s [border] town is equipped. Again, for the king’s border town a high rampart has been con- structed, extremely solid, plastered with mud and painted with white- wash, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the seventh thing with which the king’s [border] town is equipped.

What are the four kinds of supplies that the king’s [border] town obtains in abundance, easily and without difficulty? The king’s border town has been provided with plentiful quantities of water, grass, and firewood, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the first kind of supplies that the king’s [border] town obtains in abundance, easily and without difficulty. Again, the king’s border town has harvested plenty of rice and stored up plenty of wheat, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the second kind of supplies that the king’s [border] town obtains in abundance, easily and without difficulty. Again, the king’s border town has amassed plenty of grain and beans of various sorts, to ensure peace within and control outside ene mies. This is the third kind of supplies that the king’s [border] town obtains in abundance, easily and without difficulty. Again, the king’s border town has stored up ghee, honey, sugarcane, sugar, fish, salt, and dried meat, is equipped with all of these, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies. This is the fourth kind of supplies that the king’s [border] town obtains in abundance, easily and without difficulty. Such a king’s [border] town, equipped with [these] seven things and having obtained easily and without difficulty an abundance of [these] four kinds of supplies, will not be wiped out by outside enemies but only by internal self-destruction. In the same way, if a noble disciple gains seven wholesome qual ities and attains four higher states of mind easily and without difficulty, then for this reason the noble disciple will be beyond the reach of King Māra, will not be influenced by evil and unwholesome states, will not be defiled by defilements, and will not be born again. How does a noble disciple gain seven wholesome qualities? A noble disciple gains firm faith that is deeply settled in the Tathāgata, faith with firm roots that cannot be influenced by non-Buddhist renunciants or brahmins, or by gods, Māras, Brahmās, or anyone else in the world. This is how the noble disciple gains the first wholesome quality. Again, the noble disciple has at all times a sense of shame. What is shameful he knows as shameful, [namely,] evil and unwholesome

states, which pollute and defile, which have various evil consequences and create the root cause of birth and death. This is how the noble dis- ciple gains the second wholesome quality. Again, the noble disciple continuously fears wrongdoing. What is wrong he knows as wrong, [namely,] evil and unwholesome states, which pollute and defile, which will have various evil consequences and create the root cause of birth and death. This is how the noble dis- ciple gains the third wholesome quality. Again, the noble disciple continuously applies effort, cutting off what is evil and unwholesome and cultivating wholesome states. He constantly arouses his mind, is single-minded and steadfast regarding the roots of wholesomeness, without giving up his task. This is how the noble disciple gains the fourth wholesome quality. Again, the noble disciple studies widely and learns much, retaining and not forgetting it, accumulating broad learning of what is called the Dharma, which is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, which has [proper] meaning and expression, is endowed with purity, and reveals the holy life. In this way he studies widely and learns much regarding all the teachings, familiarizing himself with them even a thousand times, considering and contemplating them with knowledge, vision, and profound penetration. This is how the noble disciple gains the fifth wholesome quality. Again, the noble disciple continuously practices mindfulness, achieves right mindfulness, always recalling and not forgetting what was done or heard long ago. This is how the noble disciple gains the sixth wholesome quality. Again, the noble disciple develops comprehension and wisdom, attains understanding concerning the rise and fall of phenomena, attains noble penetrative knowledge and discriminative understanding con- cerning the true cessation of suffering. This is how the noble disciple gains the seventh wholesome quality. How does the noble disciple attain four higher states of mind, easily and without difficulty? Separated from desires, separated from evil and unwholesome states, with initial and sustained application of the mind, with joy and happiness born of separation, the noble disciple

dwells having attained the first absorption. This is how the noble disciple attains the first higher state of mind, easily and without difficulty. Again, through the calming of initial and sustained application of the mind, with inward stillness and mental one-pointedness, without initial and sustained application of the mind, with joy and happiness born of samādhi, the noble disciple dwells having attained the second absorption. This is how the noble disciple attains the second higher state of mind, easily and without difficulty. Again, separated from joy and desire, dwelling in equanimity and not seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right attentiveness, experiencing pleasure with the body, the noble disciple dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mindfulness, a happy abode.^49 This is how the noble disciple attains the third higher state of mind, easily and without dif ficulty. Again, with the cessation of pleasure and pain, and with the earlier cessation of joy and displeasure, with neither-pain-nor-pleasure, equa nimity, mindfulness, and purity, the noble disciple dwells having attained the fourth absorption. This is how the noble disciple attains the fourth higher state of mind, easily and without difficulty. In this way the noble disciple, who has gained seven wholesome qualities and attained four higher states of mind, easily and without difficulty, is beyond the reach of King Māra, and will not be influenced by evil and unwholesome states, will not be defiled by defilements and will not be born again. Just as a watchtower is constructed in the king’s border town, built firmly in the earth, indestructible, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies—in the same way, the noble disciple gains firm faith that is deeply settled in the Tathāgata, faith with firm roots that cannot be influenced by non-Buddhist renunciants or brahmins, or by gods, Māras, Brahmās, or anyone else in the world. This is how the noble disciple gains the “watchtower” of faith, which removes what is evil and unwholesome and develops wholesome states. Just as a moat is excavated [around] the king’s border town, very deep and wide, well designed and reliable, to ensure peace within and

to control outside enemies; in the same way, the noble disciple has at all times a sense of shame. What is shameful he knows as shameful, [namely] evil and unwholesome states, which pollute and defile, which have various evil consequences, and create the root cause of birth and death. This is how the noble disciple gains the “moat” of a sense of shame, which removes what is evil and unwholesome and develops wholesome states. Just as a road surrounds the king’s border town, open and clear, level and wide, to ensure peace within and control outside enemies; in the same way, the noble disciple at all times fears wrongdoing. What is wrong he knows as wrong, [namely] evil and unwholesome states, which pollute and defile, which will have various evil consequences, which create the root cause of birth and death. This is how the noble disciple gains the “level road” of the fear of wrongdoing, which removes what is evil and unwholesome and develops wholesome states. Just as an army with four divisions is raised in the king’s border town, with elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies; in the same way, the noble disciple continuously applies effort, abandoning what is evil and unwholesome and cultivating wholesome states. He constantly arouses his mind, is single-minded and steadfast regarding the roots of wholesomeness, without giving up his task. This is how the noble disciple gains the “army” of effort, which removes what is evil and unwholesome and develops wholesome states. Just as weapons are provided for the troops of the king’s border town—bows and arrows, swords and spears—to ensure peace within and control outside enemies; in the same way the noble disciple studies widely and learns much, retaining and not forgetting it, accumulating broad learning of what is called the Dharma, which is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, which has [proper] meaning and expression, is endowed with purity, and reveals the holy life. In this way he studies widely and learns much regarding all the teachings, familiarizing himself with them even a thousand times, men- tally considering and contemplating them with knowledge, vision, and profound penetration. This is how the noble disciple gains the “weapon”

of much learning, which removes what is evil and unwholesome and develops wholesome states. Just as a general is appointed as gatekeeper to the king’s border town, one who is sharp-witted and wise in making decisions, brave and resolute, of excellent counsel, who allows entry to the good and keeps out the bad, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies; in the same way the noble disciple continuously practices mindfulness, achieves right mindfulness, always recalling and not forgetting what was done or heard long ago. This is how the noble disciple gains the “gatekeeping general” of mindfulness, which removes what is evil and unwholesome and develops wholesome states. Just as a high rampart is constructed for the king’s border town, extremely solid, plastered with mud and painted with whitewash, to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies; in the same way the noble disciple develops comprehension and wisdom, attains under standing concerning the rise and fall of phenomena, attains noble pen etrative knowledge and discriminative understanding concerning the true cessation of suffering. This is how the noble disciple gains the “rampart” of wisdom, which removes what is evil and unwholesome and develops wholesome states. Just as supplies of water, grass, and firewood are provided for the king’s border town to ensure peace within and control outside enemies; in the same way the noble disciple, separated from desires, separated from evil and unwholesome states, with initial and sustained application of the mind, with joy and happiness born of seclusion, dwells having attained the first absorption. He abides in a happiness that lacks nothing, a peaceful happiness that leads naturally to nirvana. Just as plenty of rice is harvested and plenty of wheat is stored up in the king’s border town to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies; in the same way the noble disciple, through the calming of initial and sustained application of the mind, with inward stillness and mental one-pointedness, without initial and sustained application of the mind, with joy and happiness born of samādhi, dwells having attained the second absorption. He abides in a happiness that lacks noth ing, a peaceful happiness that leads naturally to nirvana.

Just as large amounts of grain and beans of various sorts are amassed in the king’s border town to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies; in the same way the noble disciple, separated from joy and desire, dwelling in equanimity and not seeking anything, with right mindfulness and right attentiveness, experiencing pleasure with the body, dwells having attained the third absorption, which the noble ones speak of as noble equanimity and mindfulness, a happy abode. He abides in a happiness that lacks nothing, a peaceful happiness that leads naturally to nirvana. Just as ghee, honey, sugarcane, sugar, fish, salt, and dried meat are stored up in the king’s border town, being equipped with all of these to ensure peace within and to control outside enemies; in the same way the noble disciple, with the cessation of pleasure and pain, and with the earlier cessation of joy and displeasure, with neither-pain- nor-pleasure, equanimity, mindfulness, and purity, dwells having attained the fourth absorption, abiding in a happiness that lacks nothing, a peaceful happiness that leads naturally to nirvana. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma3-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA39.4]] | M iii 118 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[THAG17]].3 |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA3]]
> ◄  [[ma2-bdk]] 📜  [[ma4-bdk]] ►
