---
sutta_code: "MA30"
sutta_title:
  - "Bākula Sutta "
  - "With Bakkula"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA30]]
> ◄  [[ma29-bdk]] 📜  [[ma31-bdk]] ►

### 30. The Discourse with the Parable of the Elephant’s Footprint

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time, Venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks:

Venerable friends, whatever countless wholesome states there are can all be subsumed under the four noble truths; they are all included in the four noble truths; the four noble truths are declared to be the foremost of all teachings. Why? Because they encompass all wholesome states. Venerable friends, it is just as the elephant’s footprint is foremost among the footprints of all animals, because it is the greatest, the largest. So too, venerable friends, the countless wholesome states are all sub- sumed under the four noble truths; they are all included in the four noble truths; the four noble truths are declared to be the foremost of all teachings. What are the four? They are: the noble truth of suffering, [the noble truth of] the arising of suffering, [the noble truth of] the cessation of suffering, and the noble truth of the path [leading to] the cessation of suffering. What, venerable friends, is the noble truth of suffering? It is this: birth is suffering, old age is suffering, disease is suffering, death is suffering, association with what is disliked is suffering, sep- aration from what is loved is suffering, being unable to get what one wishes is suffering; in short, the five aggregates affected by clinging are suffering. What, venerable friends, are the five aggregates affected by clinging, [which are] suffering? They are: the material form aggregate affected by clinging; the feeling [aggregate affected by clinging]; the perception [aggregate affected by clinging]; the formations [aggregate affected by clinging]; and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging. What, venerable friends, is the material form aggregate affected by clinging? It is whatever is corporeal, the four great elements and whatever is derived from the four great elements. What, venerable friends, are the four great elements? They are the earth element, the water [element], the fire [element], and the air ele- ment. What, venerable friends, is the earth element? There are, venerable friends, two kinds of earth element: there is the internal earth element and the external earth element. What, venerable friends, is the internal earth element? Whatever internally, being inside the body, is solid and solidified, whatever is inter- nally clung to. And what is that? It is: hair of the head, hair of the body,

nails, teeth, coarse and fine skin, flesh, sinews, bones, heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, spleen, intestines, stomach, feces, or whatever else that exists in this body, is found inside it, that is solid, solidified, and is internally clung to. Venerable friends, this is called the internal earth element. Venerable friends, as for the external earth element—great though it is, pure though it is, beyond reproach though it is—[yet], venerable friends, at times there is an inundation, and then the external earth ele ment disappears. Venerable friends, this external earth element—great though it is, pure though it is, beyond reproach though it is—is impermanent by nature, of a nature to be extinguished, of a nature to decay, changing by nature. How much more so this short-lived body that is clung to with craving! [Yet] the unlearned, deluded worldling thinks: “This is me,” “this is mine,” “I belong to this.” [On the other hand,] a learned noble disciple does not think: “This is me,” “this is mine,” “I belong to this.” How could he have such a thought? If people curse him, beat him, and become angry with him, he thinks: “This pain that I am expe riencing is born of causes and conditions; it is not without causes and conditions. What are the conditions? It is dependent on contact [to be experienced as] painful.” He contemplates this contact as impermanent; and he contemplates feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as impermanent. Through [contemplation of] the elements, his mind remains still, one pointed, collected, and imperturbable. If, on a later occasion, other people come and address him with gentle phrases and soft words, he thinks: This pleasure that I am experiencing is born of causes and condi tions, it is not without causes and conditions. What are the condi tions? It is dependent on contact [to be experienced as] pleasant. He contemplates this contact as impermanent, and he contemplates feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as impermanent. Through [contemplation of] the elements, his mind remains still, one pointed, collected, and imperturbable. If, on a later occasion, some people, young, middle-aged, or old, come and subject him to various

objectionable acts—perhaps punching him, stoning him, or harming him with blade or cudgel—then he thinks:

This body that I cling to is of a coarse material substance, derived from the four great elements, born of father and mother, maintained by food and drink, always requiring to be clothed, needing to sit or lie down, to be massaged and bathed, and to endure the worst. [This body is] subject to breaking up, extinction, and dissolution. It is because of this body that I am susceptible to being punched, stoned, and harmed with blade or cudgel.

[Thinking] thus, [the noble disciple] exerts himself energetically without idleness, with upright body and right mindfulness, without forgetfulness and without delusion, his mind becoming one-pointed and collected. He thinks:

I will not be neglectful. I will exert myself energetically without idleness, with upright body and right mindfulness, without for getfulness and without delusion, my mind having become one pointed and collected. This body to which I cling, let it be punched, stoned, and harmed by blade or cudgel, yet I shall ener getically train in the teaching of the World-honored One.

Venerable friends, the World-honored One has given this teaching: Suppose that bandits have come and are cutting your body limb from limb with a sharp saw. If, while those bandits are cutting your body limb from limb with a sharp saw, you were to have some change in your mind-state, or even utter evil words, then you would be failing and regressing [in your practice]. You should think thus: If a bandit comes and cuts my body limb from limb with a sharp saw, there will not, because of that, be any change in my mind- state, and I will not even utter evil words. I will arouse compassion toward the person who is cutting my body limb from limb. For his sake I shall imbue my mind with loving-kindness and dwell [mentally] pervading one direction [with loving-kindness],

likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, and also above and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I shall dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. Venerable friends, if that monk does not, through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community, dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome, then, venerable friends, this monk should feel embarrassed and ashamed, [thinking:] As for benefits, I am without them; as for virtuous qualities, I am without them; for I do not dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community. Venerable friends, just as a newlywed wife feels embarrassed and ashamed when she sees her in-laws or her husband, know that this monk is like that; he should feel embarrassed and ashamed, [thinking:] As for benefits, I am without them; as for virtuous qualities, I am without them, for I do not dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community. If, however, as a result of feeling embarrassed and ashamed, he [is then able to] dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is whole some, [thinking]: “This is excellent and peaceful, namely, the casting aside of the process of existence, the abandoning of craving, dispassion, and complete cessation without remainder,” then, venerable friends, this monk is reckoned to have trained fully and abundantly. What, venerable friends, is the water element? Venerable friends, there are two kinds of water element: there is the internal water element and the external water element. What, venerable friends, is the internal water element? Whatever internally, inside the body, is watery, moistening, and is internally clung

to; that is to say, brain, brain stem, tears, sweat, snot, phlegm, pus, blood, fat, marrow, spittle, bile, urine, or whatever else exists internally, inside the body, that is watery, moistening, and is internally clung to— this, venerable friends, is called the internal water element. Venerable friends, as for the external water element — great though it is, pure though it is, beyond reproach though it is—[yet], venerable friends, at times there is a conflagration, and then the external water element disappears. Venerable friends, this external water element—great though it is, pure though it is, beyond reproach though it is—is impermanent by nature, of a nature to be extinguished, of a nature to decay, changing by nature. How much more so this short-lived body that is clung to with craving! [Yet] the unlearned, deluded worldling thinks: “This is me,” “this is mine,” “I belong to this.” [On the other hand,] a learned noble disciple does not think: “This is me,” “this is mine,” “I belong to this.” How could he have such a thought? If people curse him, beat him, and become angry with him, he thinks:

This pain that I am experiencing is born of causes and conditions; it is not without causes and conditions. What are the conditions? It is dependent on contact [to be experienced as] painful.

He contemplates this contact as impermanent; and he contemplates feel- ing, perception, formations, and consciousness as impermanent. Through [contemplation of] the elements, his mind remains still, one-pointed, collected, and imperturbable. If, on a later occasion, other people come and address him with gentle phrases and soft words, he thinks:

This pleasure that I am experiencing is born of causes and condi tions, it is not without causes and conditions. What are the condi tions? It is dependent on contact [to be experienced as] pleasant.

He contemplates this contact as impermanent, and he contemplates feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as impermanent. Through [contemplation of] the elements, his mind remains still, one- pointed, collected, and imperturbable.

If, on a later occasion, some people, young, middle-aged, or old, come and subject him to various objectionable acts—perhaps punching him, stoning him, or harming him with blade or cudgel—then he thinks: This body that I cling to is of a coarse material substance, derived from the four great elements, born of father and mother, maintained by food and drink, always requiring to be clothed, needing to sit or lie down, to be massaged and bathed, and to endure the worst. [This body is] subject to breaking up, extinction, and dissolution. It is because of this body that I am susceptible to being punched, stoned, and harmed with blade or cudgel. [Thinking] thus, [the noble disciple] exerts himself energetically, without idleness, with upright body and right mindfulness, without forgetfulness and without delusion, his mind becomes one-pointed and collected. He thinks: I will not be neglectful. I will exert myself energetically, without idleness, with upright body and right mindfulness, without for getfulness and without delusion, my mind having become one pointed and collected. This body to which I cling, let it be punched, stoned, and harmed by blade or cudgel, yet I shall ener getically train in the teaching of the World-honored One. Venerable friends, the World-honored One has given this teaching: Suppose that bandits have come and are cutting your body limb from limb with a sharp saw. If, while those bandits are cutting your body limb from limb with a sharp saw, you were to have some change in your mind-state, or even utter evil words, then you would be failing and regressing [in your practice]. You should think thus: If a bandit comes and cuts my body limb from limb with a sharp saw, there will not, because of that, be any change in my mind state, and I will not even utter evil words. I will arouse compassion toward the person who is cutting my body limb from limb.

For his sake I shall imbue my mind with loving-kindness and dwell [mentally] pervading one direction [with loving-kindness], likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I shall dwell per vading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated.

Venerable friends, if that monk does not, through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community, dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome, then, venerable friends, this monk should feel embarrassed and ashamed, [thinking]:

As for benefits, I am without them; as for virtuous qualities, I am without them; for I do not dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community.

Venerable friends, just as a newlywed wife feels embarrassed and ashamed when she sees her in-laws or her husband, know that this monk is like that; he should feel embarrassed and ashamed [thinking]:

As for benefits, I am without them; as for virtuous qualities, I am without them, for I do not dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community.

If, however, as a result of feeling embarrassed and ashamed, he [is then able to] dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is whole- some, [thinking]: “This is excellent and peaceful, namely, the casting aside of all the process of existence, the abandoning of craving, dis- passion, and complete cessation without remainder,” then, venerable friends, this monk is reckoned to have trained fully and abundantly. What, venerable friends, is the fire element? Venerable friends, there are two kinds of fire element: there is the internal fire element and the external fire element.

What, venerable friends, is the internal fire element? Whatever internally, inside the body, is fiery, warming, and is internally clung to; that is to say, that by which the body is kept warm, that by which one becomes feverish, that by which one becomes hot and sweaty, that which gives strength, that by which food and drink are digested, or whatever else exists internally, inside the body, that is fiery, warming, and is internally clung to—this, venerable friends, is called the internal fire element. Venerable friends, as for the external fire element—great though it is, pure though it is, beyond reproach though it is—[yet], venerable friends, there is a time when the external fire element arises and, having arisen, burns villages, towns, mountain forests, and wilderness; and having burned these, it reaches a road or reaches water, and becomes extinguished for lack of fuel. [Yet,] venerable friends, after such con flagration, people seek to make fire, by means of drilling wood or bam boo, or by striking flint. Venerable friends, this external fire element—great though it is, pure though it is, beyond reproach though it is—is impermanent by nature, of a nature to be extinguished, of a nature to decay, changing by nature. How much more so this short-lived body that is clung to with craving! [Yet] the unlearned, deluded worldling thinks: “This is me,” “this is mine,” “I belong to this.” [On the other hand,] a learned noble disciple does not think: “This is me,” “this is mine,” “I belong to this.” How could he have such a thought? If people curse him, beat him, and become angry with him, he thinks: This pain that I am experiencing is born of causes and conditions; it is not without causes and conditions. What are the conditions? It is dependent on contact [to be experienced as] painful. He contemplates this contact as impermanent; and he contemplates feel ing, perception, formations, and consciousness as impermanent. Through [contemplation of] the elements, his mind remains still, one-pointed, collected, and imperturbable. If, on a later occasion, other people come and address him with gentle phrases and soft words, he thinks:

This pleasure that I am experiencing is born of causes and condi tions, it is not without causes and conditions. What are the condi tions? It is dependent on contact [to be experienced as] pleasant.

He contemplates this contact as impermanent, and he contemplates feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as impermanent. Through [contemplation of] the elements, his mind remains still, one- pointed, collected, and imperturbable. If, on a later occasion, some people, young, middle-aged, or old, come and subject him to various objectionable acts—perhaps punching him, stoning him, or harming him with blade or cudgel—then he thinks:

This body that I cling to is of a coarse material substance, derived from the four great elements, born of father and mother, maintained by food and drink, always requiring to be clothed, needing to sit or lie down, to be massaged and bathed, and to endure the worst. [This body is] subject to breaking up, extinction, and dissolution. It is because of this body that I am susceptible to being punched, stoned, and harmed with blade or cudgel.

[Thinking] thus, [the noble disciple] exerts himself energetically, with- out idleness, with upright body and right mindfulness, without for- getfulness and without delusion, his mind becoming one-pointed and collected. He thinks: I will exert myself energetically, without idleness, with upright body and right mindfulness, without forgetfulness and without delusion, my mind having become one-pointed and collected. This body to which I cling, let it be punched, stoned, and harmed by blade or cudgel, yet I shall energetically train in the teaching of the World-honored One.

Venerable friends, the World-honored One has given this teaching: Suppose that bandits have come and are cutting your body limb from limb with a sharp saw. If, while those bandits are cutting your body limb from limb with a sharp saw, you were to have some change in

your mind-state, or even utter evil words, then you would be failing and regressing [in your practice]. You should think thus: If a bandit comes and cuts my body limb from limb with a sharp saw, there will not, because of that, be any change in my mind state, and I will not even utter evil words. I will arouse compassion toward the person who is cutting my body limb from limb. For his sake I shall imbue my mind with loving-kindness and dwell [mentally] pervading one direction [with loving-kindness], likewise the second, third, and fourth directions, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I shall dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. Venerable friends, if that monk does not, through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community, dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome, then, venerable friends, this monk should feel embarrassed and ashamed, [thinking]: As for benefits, I am without them; as for virtuous qualities, I am without them; for I do not dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community. Venerable friends, just as a newlywed wife feels embarrassed and ashamed when she sees her in-laws or her husband, know that this monk is like that; he should feel embarrassed and ashamed [thinking]: As for benefits, I am without them; as for virtuous qualities, I am without them, for I do not dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community. If, however, as a result of feeling embarrassed and ashamed, he [is then able to] dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome,

[thinking]: “This is excellent and peaceful, namely, the casting aside of all the process of existence, the abandoning of craving, dispassion, and complete cessation without remainder,” then, venerable friends, this monk is reckoned to have trained fully and abundantly. What, venerable friends, is the air element? Venerable friends, there are two kinds of air element: there is the internal air element and the external air element. What, venerable friends, is the internal air element? Whatever inter- nally, inside the body, is airy, moving, and is internally clung to; that is to say, upward winds, downward winds, winds in the bowels, coursing winds, pulling and contracting winds, stabbing winds, pushing winds, circulating winds, winds in the limbs, out-breath, in-breath, or whatever else internally, inside the body, is airy, moving, and is internally clung to—this, venerable friends, is called the internal wind element. Venerable friends, as for the external wind element—great though it is, pure though it is, beyond reproach though it is—[yet], venerable friends, there are times when the external air element arises and, having arisen, knocks over houses, uproots trees, and causes landslides. When it encounters a mountain or the face of a cliff, it stops and becomes still. [Yet,] friends, when the external air element becomes still, people seek to make wind by using a fan, a palm frond, or a cloth. Venerable friends, this external air element—great though it is, pure though it is, beyond reproach though it is—is impermanent by nature, of a nature to be extinguished, of a nature to decay, changing by nature. How much more so this short-lived body that is clung to with craving! [Yet] the unlearned, deluded worldling thinks: “This is me,” “this is mine,” “I belong to this.” [On the other hand,] a learned noble disciple does not think: “This is me,” “this is mine,” “I belong to this.” How could he have such a thought? If people curse him, beat him, and become angry with him, he thinks:

This pain that I am experiencing is born of causes and conditions; it is not without causes and conditions. What are the conditions? It is dependent on contact [to be experienced as] painful.

He contemplates this contact as impermanent; and he contemplates feel ing, perception, formations, and consciousness as impermanent. Through [contemplation of] the elements, his mind remains still, one-pointed, collected, and imperturbable. If, on a later occasion, other people come and address him with gentle phrases and soft words, he thinks: This pleasure that I am experiencing is born of causes and condi tions, it is not without causes and conditions. What are the condi tions? It is dependent on contact [to be experienced as] pleasant. He contemplates this contact as impermanent, and he contemplates feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness as impermanent. Through [contemplation of] the elements, his mind remains still, one pointed, collected, and imperturbable. If, on a later occasion, some people, young, middle-aged, or old, come and subject him to various objectionable acts—perhaps punching him, stoning him, or harming him with blade or cudgel—then he thinks: This body that I cling to is of a coarse material substance, derived from the four great elements, born of father and mother, maintained by food and drink, always requiring to be clothed, needing to sit or lie down, to be massaged and bathed, and to endure the worst. [This body is] subject to breaking up, extinction, and dissolution. It is because of this body that I am susceptible to being punched, stoned, and harmed with blade or cudgel. [Thinking] thus, [the noble disciple] exerts himself energetically, without idleness, with upright body and right mindfulness, without forgetfulness and without delusion, his mind becoming one-pointed and collected. He thinks: I will exert myself energetically, without idleness, with upright body and right mindfulness, without forgetfulness and without delusion, my mind having become one-pointed and collected. This body to which I cling, let it be punched, stoned, and harmed by blade or cudgel, yet I shall energetically train in the teaching of the World-honored One.

Venerable friends, the World-honored One has given this teaching: Suppose that bandits have come and are cutting your body limb from limb with a sharp saw. If, while those bandits are cutting your body limb from limb with a sharp saw, you were to have some change in your mind-state, or even utter evil words, then you would be failing and regressing [in your practice]. You should think thus: If a bandit comes and cuts my body limb from limb with a sharp saw, there will not, because of that, be any change in my mind- state, and I will not even utter evil words. I will arouse compassion toward the person who is cutting my body limb from limb. For his sake I shall imbue my mind with loving-kindness and dwell [mentally] pervading one direction [with loving-kindness], likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, I shall dwell per- vading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated.

Venerable friends, if that monk does not, through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community, dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome, then, venerable friends, this monk should feel embarrassed and ashamed, [thinking]:

As for benefits, I am without them; as for virtuous qualities, I am without them; for I do not dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is wholesome through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community.

Venerable friends, just as a newlywed wife feels embarrassed and ashamed when she sees her in-laws or her husband, know that this monk is like that; he should feel embarrassed and ashamed [thinking]:

As for benefits, I am without them; as for virtuous qualities, I am without them, for I do not dwell in equanimity that is in harmony

with what is wholesome through [recollecting] the Buddha, the Dharma, and the monastic community. If, however, as a result of feeling embarrassed and ashamed, he [is then able to] dwell in equanimity that is in harmony with what is whole some, [thinking]: “This is excellent and peaceful, namely, the casting aside of all the process of existence, the abandoning of craving, dis passion, and complete cessation without remainder,” then, venerable friends, this monk is reckoned to have trained fully and abundantly. Venerable friends, just as when a space is enclosed by timber, clay, and reeds it comes to be termed a “house,” so too, venerable friends, it is with this body: know that when a space is enclosed by sinews, bones, skin, flesh, and blood it comes to be termed a “body.” Venerable friends, if internally the eye sense base is not intact, [and if] external forms are not illuminated by light, so that no awareness occurs, then eye consciousness does not come to arise. Venerable friends, if [however,] internally the eye sense base is intact, [and if] external forms are illuminated by light so that awareness occurs, then eye consciousness comes to arise. Venerable friends, the internal eye sense base and forms—[that is,] the external forms cognized by eye consciousness—belong to the material form aggregate. Any feeling [that thus] comes to be belongs to the feeling aggregate. Any perception [that thus] comes to be belongs to the perception aggregate. Any volitional formation [that thus] comes to be belongs to the volitional formations aggregate. Any consciousness [that thus] comes to be belongs to the consciousness aggregate. This is how one contemplates the conjunction of the aggregates. Venerable friends, the World-honored One has also given this teaching: “If one sees dependent origination, one sees the Dharma; if one sees the Dharma, one sees dependent origination.” Why? Venerable friends, the World-honored One teaches that the five aggregates affected by clinging—the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling [aggregate affected by clinging], the perception [aggregate affected by clinging], the formations [aggregate affected by clinging], and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging— arise from causes and conditions.

Venerable friends, if internally the ear... , the nose... , the tongue... , the body... , the mind sense base is not intact, [and if] external mind objects are not illuminated by light^114 so that no awareness occurs, then mind consciousness does not arise. Venerable friends, if internally the mind sense base is intact, [and if] external mind objects are illuminated by light so that awareness occurs, then mind consciousness comes to arise. Venerable friends, the internal mind sense base and mind objects— [that is,] the external mind objects cognized by mind consciousness— belong to the material form aggregate.^115 Any feeling [that thus] comes to be belongs to the feeling aggregate. Any perception [that thus] comes to be belongs to the perception aggregate. Any volitional formation [that thus] comes to be belongs to the volitional formations aggregate. Any consciousness [that thus] comes to be belongs to the consciousness aggre- gate. This is how one contemplates the conjunction of the aggregates. Venerable friends, the World-honored One has also given this teaching: “If one sees dependent origination, one sees the Dharma; if one sees the Dharma, one sees dependent origination.” Why? Venerable friends, the World-honored One teaches that the five aggregates affected by clinging—the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling [aggregate affected by clinging], the perception [aggregate affected by clinging], the formations aggregate [affected by clinging], and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging— arise from causes and conditions. [One who contemplates this] becomes disenchanted with past, future, and present [manifestations of the] five aggregates affected by clinging. Being disenchanted, he becomes dis- passionate. Through dispassion he becomes liberated. Being liberated, he knows he is liberated, he knows as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what was to be done has been done. There will not be another existence.” Venerable friends, such a monk is reckoned to have trained fully and abundantly. This is what the venerable Sāriputta said. Having heard the venerable Sāriputta’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma30-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M iii 124 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA28]], [[]], [[PLI-TV-KD16]], [[AN3.35]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN5.197]], [[AN7.62]], [[MA193]], [[MA31]], [[MA8]], [[MN141]], [[MN21]], [[SN22.5]], [[SN4.9]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA30]]
> ◄  [[ma29-bdk]] 📜  [[ma31-bdk]] ►
