---
sutta_code: "MA31"
sutta_title:
  - "分別聖諦 "
  - "Analysis of the Noble Truths"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA31]]
> ◄  [[ma30-bdk]] 📜  [[ma32-bdk]] ►

### 31. The Discourse on Discerning the Noble Truths

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time, the World-honored One addressed the monks: This is the proper mode of teaching the Dharma, namely: to fully encompass the four noble truths, to fully examine them, analyze them, reveal, exhibit, describe, and announce them, and to advance [under standing] of them. Tathāgatas in the past, without attachment and fully awakened, employed this proper mode of teaching the Dharma, namely: to fully encompass the four noble truths, to fully examine them, analyze them, reveal, exhibit, describe, and announce them, and to advance [under standing] of them. Tathāgatas in the future, without attachments and fully awakened, will employ this proper mode of teaching the Dharma, namely: to fully encompass the four noble truths, to fully examine them, analyze them, reveal, exhibit, describe, and announce them, and to advance [under standing] of them. I, too, the Tathāgata of the present, without attachment and fully awakened, employ this proper mode of teaching the Dharma, namely: to fully encompass the four noble truths, to fully examine them, analyze them, reveal, exhibit, describe, and announce them, and to advance [understanding] of them. The monk Sāriputta is endowed with bright wisdom, quick wisdom, lively wisdom, keen wisdom, extensive wisdom, profound wisdom, wis dom that brings release, penetrative wisdom, eloquent wisdom. The monk Sāriputta has achieved genuine wisdom. Why [do I say this]? Because after I teach the four noble truths in brief, the monk Sāriputta is then able to explain them to others in detail, to fully encom pass them, to fully examine them, analyze them, reveal, exhibit, describe, and announce them, and to advance [understanding] of them. And when the monk Sāriputta teaches and explains in detail the four noble truths, analyzing them, revealing, exhibiting, describing,

and announcing them, and advancing [understanding] of them, he causes countless beings to gain insight [into them]. The monk Sāriputta is able to guide and train others through [estab- lishing them in] right view, [while] the monk Moggallāna is able to establish them in the highest goal, namely the complete cessation of the taints. The monk Sāriputta is like a mother, “giving birth to” his companions in the holy life, [while] the monk Moggallāna is like a nurse, nurturing his companions in the holy life. For this reason, [their] companions in the holy life should respect, honor, venerate, and pay homage to the monks Sāriputta and Moggallāna. Why? The monks Sāriputta and Moggallāna seek to benefit their companions in the holy life, seek their well-being and happiness. Having said this, the World-honored One rose from his seat and went into his dwelling to sit in meditation. Then, the venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks:

Venerable friends, the World-honored One has appeared in this world for our sake. He has widely taught and explained the four noble truths, analyzed them, revealed, exhibited, described, and announced them, and advanced [understanding] of them. What are the four? They are: the noble truth of suffering, [the noble truth of] the arising of suffering, [the noble truth of] the cessation of suffering, and the noble truth of the path [leading to] the cessation of suffering. What, venerable friends, is the noble truth of suffering? Birth is suffering, old age is suffering, disease is suffering, death is suffering, association with what is disliked is suffering, separation from what is loved is suffering, being unable to get what one wishes is suffering; in short, the five aggregates affected by clinging are suffering. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “birth is suffering,” on what basis is this said? Venerable friends, “birth” is when living beings, in their various forms, experience birth, when they are born, when they are brought into existence, when they are formed, when the five aggre gates come into being, and when the vital faculties develop—this is called birth. [As for] “birth is suffering”—venerable friends, when living beings are born, they experience physical pain, experience it

throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it through out. They experience physical fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience mental fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and mental fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. They experience strong physical fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience strong mental fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience strong physical and mental fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “birth is suffering,” it is said on this basis. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “old age is suffering,” on what basis is this said? Venerable friends, “old age” is when living beings in their various forms become senile, with hoary hair, lost teeth, deteriorating health, hunched body, unsteady step, overweight body, shortness of breath, reliance on a walking cane, shrinking flesh, sagging skin, wrinkles like pockmarks, failing sense faculties, and unsightly complexion. This is called old age. [As for] “old age is suffering”—venerable friends, when living beings become old, they experience physical pain, experience it through out, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. They experience physical fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it through out; they experience mental fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and mental fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. They experience strong physical fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience strong mental fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience strong physical and mental fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “old age is suffering,” it is said on this basis.

Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “disease is suffering,” on what basis is this said? Venerable friends, “disease” refers to headache, sore eyes, earache, sore nose, pain in the face, sore lips, toothache, pain in the tongue, pain in the palate, sore throat, panting, coughing, vomiting, hoarseness, epilepsy, swelling, hypersalivation, bloody phlegm, fever, emaciation, hemorrhoids, and diarrhea. When these and the various other symptoms of disease arise, they do so in dependence on contact. They do not arise independently of the mind, [though] they manifest in the body. Such is disease. [As for] “disease is suffering”—venerable friends, when living beings become diseased, they experience physical pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. They experience physical fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience mental fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and mental fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. They experience strong physical fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience strong mental fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience strong physical and mental fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. Ven- erable friends, [when] it is said, “disease is suffering,” it is said on this basis. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “death is suffering,” on what basis is this said? Venerable friends, “death” is when sentient beings, in their various forms, come to the end of life and [succumb to] imper- manence; when they die, disappear, break up, and are extinguished; when their life span is ended, destroyed; when their vital force shuts down. This is called death. [As for] “death is suffering”—venerable friends, when living beings die, they experience physical pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and

mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. They experience physical fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience mental fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and mental fever, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. They experience strong physical fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience strong mental fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience strong physical and mental fever, affliction, and anguish, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “death is suffering,” it is said on this basis. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “association with what is dis liked is suffering,” on what basis is this said? Venerable friends, with regard to “association with what is disliked,” living beings truly have six internal sense bases; and when, by way of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind, they sense an unliked object and find themselves together with it, in company with it, associated with it, conjoined with it, then they experience suffering. It is the same with the external sense objects, and also with [the resulting] contact, feeling, perception, volition, and craving. Venerable friends, living beings truly consist of the six elements; and when, by way of the earth element, water [element], fire [element], air [element], space [element], or consciousness element, they encounter an unliked object and find themselves together with it, in company with it, associated with it, conjoined with it, then they experience suf fering. This is called association with what is disliked. [As for] “association with what is disliked is suffering” —venerable friends, when living beings are associated with what they dislike, they experience physical pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “association with what is disliked is suffering,” it is said on this basis.

Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “separation from what is loved is suffering,” on what basis is this said? Venerable friends, with regard to “separation from what is loved,” living beings truly have six internal sense bases; and when, by way of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind, they sense a loved object and find themselves separated from it, not connected with it, divided from it, not associated with it, not con- joined with it, then they experience suffering. It is the same with the external sense objects, and also with [the resulting] contact, feeling, perception, volition, and craving. Venerable friends, living beings truly consist of the six elements; and when, by way of the earth element, water [element], fire [element], air [element], space [element], or consciousness element, they encounter a loved object and find themselves separated from it, not connected with it, divided from it, not associated with it, not conjoined with it, then they experience suffering. This is called separation from what is loved. [As for] “separation from what is loved is suffering”—venerable friends, when living beings are separated from what they love, they experience physical pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout; they experience physical and mental pain, experience it throughout, feel it, feel it throughout. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “separation from what is loved is suffering,” it is said on this basis. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “being unable to get what one wishes is suffering,” on what basis is this said? Venerable friends, living beings, who are subject to birth, who are not free from birth, wish not to be subject to birth– but this truly cannot be achieved by [mere] wishing. [Living beings, who are subject to] old age... , death.

.. , sorrow and lamentation, who are not free from sorrow and lamen- tation, wish not to be subject to sorrow and lamentation—but this too cannot be achieved by [mere] wishing. Venerable friends, living beings who are actually experiencing pain, which is unpleasant and disagreeable, think: “I am experiencing pain, which is unpleasant and disagreeable. I wish this would change

and become agreeable!”—but this too cannot be achieved by [mere] wishing. Venerable friends, living beings, who are actually experiencing pleasure, which is agreeable, think: “I am experiencing pleasure, which is agreeable. I wish this could last forever, remain, and not be subject to change!”—but this too cannot be achieved by [mere] wishing. Venerable friends, living beings who are actually experiencing intentions and perceptions that are unpleasant and disagreeable, think: “I am experiencing intentions and perceptions that are unpleasant and disagreeable. I wish these would change and become agreeable!”— but this too cannot be achieved by [mere] wishing. Venerable friends, living beings who are actually experiencing intentions and perceptions that are agreeable, think: “I am experiencing intentions and perceptions that are agreeable. I wish these could last forever, remain, and not be subject to change!”—but this too cannot be achieved by [mere] wishing. Venerable friends, [when] it is said “being unable to get what one wishes is suffering,” it is said on this basis. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “in short, the five aggregates affected by clinging are suffering,” on what basis is this said? There are the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling [aggre gate affected by clinging], the perception [aggregate affected by cling ing], the formations [aggregate affected by clinging], and the con sciousness aggregate affected by clinging. Venerable friends, [when] it is said, “in short, the five aggregates affected by clinging are suffer ing,” it is said on this basis. Venerable friends, the noble truth of suffering was so in the past, the noble truth of suffering will be so in the future, and is so in the present. It is genuinely true, not false; it does not depart from the way things are; it is not distorted; it is genuinely true, exact, and valid; it is truth that accords with the way things are. It is what the noble ones are endowed with, what the noble ones know, what the noble ones see, what the noble ones comprehend, what the noble ones attain, what the noble ones fully awaken to. For these reasons it is called the “noble” truth of suffering.

What, venerable friends, is the noble truth of the arising of suffering due to the arising of craving? Living beings truly have craving associated with the six internal sense bases, with the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there is craving, affection, defilement, and attachment associated with these, that is called arising. Venerable friends, a learned noble disciple knows: “Thus I under- stand this teaching, thus I see it, thus I comprehend it, thus I contemplate it, thus I realize it.” This is what is called the noble truth of the arising of suffering [due to] the arising of craving. How does he [the noble disciple] know it thus? If there is craving for one’s wife, children, male and female servants, messengers, retainers, fields, houses, shops, income, and wealth; if, when working on behalf of them, there is craving, affection, defilement, and attachment, then this is called arising. [This is how] he knows this noble truth of the arising of suffering [due to] the arising of craving. It is the same with the external sense objects, and again with the [associated] contact, feel- ing, perception, volition, and craving. Venerable friends, living beings truly have craving for the six ele- ments, for the earth element, the water [element], the fire [element], the air [element], the space [element], and the consciousness element. When there is craving, affection, defilement, and attachment associated with these, that is called the arising [of suffering]. Venerable friends, a learned noble disciple knows: “Thus I under- stand this teaching, thus I see it, thus I comprehend it, thus I contemplate it, thus I realize it.” This is what is called the noble truth of the arising of suffering [due to] the arising of craving. How does he [the noble disciple] know it thus? If there is craving for one’s wife, children, male and female servants, messengers, retainers, fields, houses, shops, income, and wealth; if, when working on behalf of them, there is craving, affection, defilement, and attachment, then this is called the arising [of suffering]. [This is how] he knows this noble truth of the arising of suffering [due to] the arising of craving. Venerable friends, the noble truth of the arising of suffering [due to] the arising of craving was so in the past, the noble truth of suffering [due to] the arising of craving will be so in the future, and is so in the

present. It is genuinely true, not false; it does not depart from the way things are; it is not distorted; it is genuinely true, exact, and valid; it is truth that accords with the way things are. It is what the noble ones are endowed with, what the noble ones know, what the noble ones see, what the noble ones comprehend, what the noble ones attain, what the noble ones fully awaken to. For these reasons it is called the “noble” truth of the arising of suffering [due to] the arising of craving. What, venerable friends, is the noble truth of the cessation of suf fering [due to] the cessation of craving? Living beings truly have craving associated with the six internal sense bases, with the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. [But] when one is liberated [from this craving], without defilement or attachment, [through] discarding and expelling, through dispassion, it gets extinguished and stops—that is called the cessation of suffering. Venerable friends, a learned noble disciple knows: “Thus I understand this teaching, thus I see it, thus I comprehend it, thus I contemplateit, thus I realize it.” This is what is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering [due to] the cessation of craving. How does he know it thus? If there is no craving for one’s wife, children, male and female servants, messengers, retainers, fields, houses, shops, income, and wealth; if, when working on behalf of them, one is liberated [from this craving], without defilement or attachment, [through] discarding and expelling, through dispassion, it gets extinguished and stops—that is called the cessation of suffering. This is how he knows the noble truth of the cessation of suffering [due to] the cessation of craving. It is the same with the external sense objects, and again with the [associated] contact, feeling, perception, volition, and craving. Venerable friends, living beings truly have craving for the six elements, for the earth element, the water [element], the fire [ele ment], the air [element], the space [element], and the consciousness element. [But] when one is liberated [from this craving], without defilement or attachment, [through] discarding and expelling, through dispassion, it gets extinguished and stops—that is called the cessation of suffering.

Venerable friends, a learned noble disciple knows: “Thus I under- stand this teaching, thus I see it, thus I comprehend it, thus I contemplate it, thus I realize it.” This is what is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering [due to] the cessation of craving. How does he know it thus? If there is no craving for one’s wife, children, male and female servants, messengers, retainers, fields, houses, shops, income, and wealth; if, when working on behalf of them, one is liberated [from this craving], without defilement or attachment, [through] discarding and expelling, through dispassion, it gets extinguished and stops—that is called the cessation of suffering. This is how he knows the noble truth of the cessation of suffering [due to] the cessation of craving. Venerable friends, the noble truth of the cessation of suffering [due to] the cessation of craving was so in the past, the noble truth of the cessation of suffering [due to] the cessation of craving will be so in the future, and is so in the present. It is genuinely true, not false; it does not depart from the way things are; it is not distorted; it is genuinely true, exact, and valid; it is truth that accords with the way things are. It is what the noble ones are endowed with, what the noble ones know, what the noble ones see, what the noble ones comprehend, what the noble ones attain, what the noble ones fully awaken to. For these reasons it is called the “noble” truth of the cessation of suffering [due to] the cessation of craving. What, venerable friends, is the noble truth of the path [leading to] the cessation [of suffering]. It is this: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right samādhi. What, venerable friends, is right view? When the noble disciple is mindful of suffering as suffering,... of its arising as its arising,.. of its cessation as its cessation, and mindful of the path as the path; or when he contemplates his former actions; or when he trains to be mind- ful of all formations; or when he sees the danger in all formations; or when he sees the tranquility and calm of nirvana; or when he, free from attachment, mindfully contemplates the mind as liberated—whatever therein is investigation, comprehensive investigation, successive inves- tigation, investigation of phenomena, examination, comprehensive

examination, observation, knowledge, and realization—that is called right view. What, venerable friends, is right intention? When the noble disciple is mindful of suffering as suffering,... of its arising as its arising,..

. of its cessation as its cessation, and mindful of the path as the path; or when he contemplates his former actions; or when he trains to be mindful of all formations; or when he sees the danger in all formations; or when he sees the tranquility and calm of nirvana; or when he, being freed from attachment, mindfully contemplates the mind as liberated— whatever therein is mental thought, comprehensive thought, appropriate thought, thinking of what should be thought of, aspiring to what should be aspired to—this is called right intention. What, venerable friends, is right speech? When the noble disciple is mindful of suffering as suffering,... of its arising as its arising,... of its cessation as its cessation, and mindful of the path as the path; or when he contemplates his former actions; or when he trains to be mind- ful of all formations; or when he sees the danger in all formations; or when he sees the tranquility and calm of nirvana; or when he, free from attachment, mindfully contemplates the mind as liberated—then what- ever therein, in addition to the four kinds of good verbal conduct [abstention from lying, etc.], constitutes abstaining and abandoning of every other kind of evil verbal conduct, not practicing it, not doing it, not condoning it, not associating with it—this is called right speech. What, venerable friends, is right action? When the noble disciple is mindful of suffering as suffering,... of its arising as its arising,... of its cessation as its cessation, and mindful of the path as the path; or when he contemplates his former actions; or when he trains to be mindful of all formations; or when he sees the danger in all formations; or when he sees the tranquility and calm of nirvana; or when he, free from attach- ment, mindfully contemplates the mind as liberated—whatever therein, in addition to the three kinds of good bodily conduct [abstention from killing etc.] constitutes abstaining and abandoning of every other kind of evil bodily conduct, not practicing it, not doing it, not condoning it, not associating with it—this is called right action.

What, venerable friends, is right livelihood? When the noble dis- ciple is mindful of suffering as suffering,... of its arising as its arising,... of its cessation as its cessation, and mindful of the path as the path; or when he contemplates his former actions; or when he trains to be mindful of all formations; or when he sees the danger in all formations; or when he sees the tranquility and calm of nirvana; or when he, free from attachment, mindfully contemplates the mind as liberated—whatever therein is not seeking [to make a livelihood] by inappropriate means, nor out of excessive desire and dissatisfaction, nor by the various forms of wrong livelihood, [such as] performing tricks or incantations, but instead seeking robes in ways that are in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma, seeking food, beds, and seats in ways that are in accordance with the Dharma, not contrary to the Dharma—this is called right livelihood. What, venerable friends, is right effort? When the noble disciple is mindful of suffering as suffering,... of its arising as its arising,... of its cessation as its cessation, and mindful of the path as the path; or when he contemplates his former actions; or when he trains to be mindfulof all formations; or when he sees the danger in all formations; or when he sees the tranquility and calm of nirvana; or when he, free from attachment, mindfully contemplates the mind as liberated—whatever therein is vigor, effort, unified diligent striving, power in progressing, focused application without remission, without decline, to rightly master the mind—this is called right effort. What, venerable friends, is right mindfulness? When the noble disciple is mindful of suffering as suffering,... of its arising as its arising,... of its cessation as its cessation, and mindful of the path as the path; or when he contemplates his former actions; or when he trains to be mindful of all formations; or when he sees the danger in all for- mations; or when he sees the stillness and tranquility of nirvana; or when he, free from attachment, mindfully contemplates the mind as liberated—whatever therein is the mind’s concordance with mindful- ness, its turning away from non-mindfulness, its being comprehensively mindful, recollecting and again recollecting, the mind’s being straight,^117

non-forgetfulness of what the mind is responding to—this is called right mindfulness. What, venerable friends, is right samādhi? When the noble disciple is mindful of suffering as suffering,... of its arising as its arising,... of its cessation as its cessation, and mindful of the path as the path; or when he contemplates his former actions; or when he trains to be mindful of all formations; or when he sees the danger in all for mations; or when he sees the tranquility and calm of nirvana; or when he, free from attachment, mindfully contemplates the mind as liber ated—whatever therein is the mind’s stability, its being established in the absorptions, established accordingly, being unwavering and not scattered, being focused, stilled, and rightly collected—this is called right samādhi. Venerable friends, the noble truth of the path leading to the ces sation of suffering was so in the past, the noble truth of the path leading to the cessation of suffering will be so in the future, and is so in the present. It is genuinely true, not false; it does not depart from the way things are; it is not distorted; it is genuinely true, exact, and valid; it is truth that accords with the way things are. It is what the noble ones are endowed with, what the noble ones know, what the noble ones see, what the noble ones comprehend, what the noble ones attain, what the noble ones fully awaken to. For these reasons it is called the “noble” truth of the path leading to the cessation of suffering. [Sāriputta] then uttered the following verse: The Buddha has clearly comprehended all things; He has seen the countless wholesome and meritorious qualities, The truths of suffering, its arising, its cessation, and the path; Skillfully revealing and explaining them. This is what Vnerable Sāriputta said. Having heard Venerable Sāriputta’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.

## Division 4 On Extraordinary Qualities


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma31-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA12.1]], [[EA27.1]], [[MA81]], [[MA98]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DA21]], [[SN41.3]], [[PLI-TV-KD21]], [[AN10.69]], [[DN2]], [[MN76]], [[PLI-TV-BU-VB-PC85]], [[SN56.10]], [[PLI-TV-KD5]], [[DN28]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN3.134]], [[DN22]], [[MA31]], [[MN117]], [[SN12.20]], [[SN56.11]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA31]]
> ◄  [[ma30-bdk]] 📜  [[ma32-bdk]] ►
