---
sutta_code: "MA33"
sutta_title:
  - "Anuruddha Sutta "
  - "With Anuruddha"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA33]]
> ◄  [[ma32-bdk]] 📜  [[ma34-bdk]] ►

### 33. The Discourse on [How Ānanda Became] the Attendant

Thus have I heard: At one time, the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha. At that time, renowned, highly regarded, and virtuous senior monks and chief dis- ciples, such as Venerable Koṇḍañña; Venerable Assaji; Venerable Bha ddhiya, the [former] king of the Sakyas; Venerable Mahānāma, the Koliyan; Venerable Vappa; Venerable Yasa; Venerable Puṇṇa; Venerable Vimala; Venerable Qiehepoti;^120 Venerable Xutuoye;^121 Venerable Sāriputta; Venerable Anurud- dha; Venerable Nanda; Venerable Kimbila; Venerable Revata; Venerable Mahā Moggallāna; Venerable Mahā Kassapa; Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita; Ven- erable Mahā Cunda; Venerable Mahā Kaccāyana; the venerable elder Bin- noujiatuniao;^122 the venerable elder Yasa, the issuer of tokens; and other such renowned, highly regarded, and virtuous senior monks and chief disciples who were also staying at Rājagaha, dwelling near the leaf hut of the Buddha. At that time, the World-honored One addressed the monks: I am now old. My body is running down and my life span is coming to an end. I am in need of an attendant. All of you consider this and recom- mend an attendant, one who will look after my daily needs appropriately and who will receive my instructions without losing their meaning. Thereupon, Venerable Koṇḍañña rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder and, placing his palms together [in respect] toward the Buddha, said, “World-honored One, I wish to look after your daily needs appropriately and to receive your instructions without losing their meaning.” The World-honored One said:

Koṇḍañña, you are old yourself. Your body [too] is running down and your life span is coming to an end. You need an attendant yourself. Koṇḍañña, you may return to your seat. Thereupon Venerable Koṇḍañña paid respect at the Buddha’s feet and returned to his seat. In this way, Venerable Assaji; Venerable Bhaddhiya, the [former] king of the Sakyas; Venerable Mahānāma, [the Koliyan]; Venerable Vappa; Ven erable Yasa; Venerable Puṇṇa; Venerable Vimala; Venerable Qiehepoti; Ven erable Xutuoye; Venerable Sāriputta; Venerable Anuruddha; Venerable Nanda; Venerable Kimbila; Venerable Revata; Venerable Mahā Mogga llāna; Venerable Mahā Kassapa; Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita; Venerable Mahā Cunda; Venerable Mahā Kaccāyana; the venerable elder Binnoujiatuniao; and the venerable elder Yasa, the issuer of tokens—[each in turn] rose from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder and, placing his hands with palms together [in respect] toward the Buddha, said, “World-honored One, I wish to look after your daily needs appropriately and to receive your instructions without losing their meaning.” The World-honored One said [to each of them, and finally to Yasa]: Yasa, you are old yourself. Your body [too] is running down and your life span is coming to an end. You need an attendant yourself, Yasa, you may return to your seat. Thereupon the venerable Yasa paid respect at the Buddha’s feet and returned to his seat. At that time, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna, who was among the assem bly, thought: Whom does the World-honored One wish to have as his attendant? Which monk does he intend to choose to look after him appropriately, and to receive his instructions without losing their meaning? Let me enter samādhi such that I [can] survey the minds of the monks in the assembly. Then Venerable Mahā Moggallāna entered samādhi such that he [could] survey the minds of the monks in the assembly. He then knew that

the World-honored One wished to have Venerable Ānanda as his attendant. His intention was to choose Ānanda to look after his daily needs appropriately and receive his instructions without losing their meaning. Then Venerable Mahā Moggallāna came out of samādhi and told the monks in the assembly:

Venerable friends, did you know this? The World-honored One wishes to have Venerable Ānanda as his attendant. His intention is to choose Ānanda to look after his daily needs appropriately and receive his instructions without losing their meaning. Venerable friends, we should now together approach Venerable Ānanda and persuade him to become the World-honored One’s attendant. Then the venerable Mahā Moggallāna together with the other monks approached Venerable Ānanda. After exchanging courteous greetings, they sat down to one side. Then, having sat down, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna said:

Venerable Ānanda, did you know this? The Buddha wishes to have you as his attendant. His intention is to choose you to look after his daily needs appropriately and receive his instructions without losing their meaning. Ānanda, it is as if there were, not far from a village, a gabled hall with a viewing tower and an open window facing toward the east; the sunlight at dawn would shine on its western wall. Similarly, friend Ānanda, the World-honored One wishes to have you as his attendant. His intention is: “May Ānanda look after my daily needs appropriately and receive my instructions without losing their meaning.” Friend Ānanda, may you now become the attendant of the World-honored One! Venerable Ānanda replied: Venerable Mahā Moggallāna, I would not dare to become the attendant of the World-honored One. Why is that? Difficult indeed is it to attend on a buddha, a World-honored One, that is to say, to be his attendant. Venerable Mahā Moggallāna, it is as if there were a great royal elephant, full sixty years old, proud, powerful, with tusks intact and body full of vigor; difficult indeed is it to come close to him, that is to say, to be

his keeper. It is similar, Venerable Mahā Moggallāna, with a Tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened; difficult indeed is it to come close to him, that is to say, to be his attendant. Venerable Mahā Mog gallāna, this is why I would not [dare to] become the attendant [of the World-honored One]. Venerable Mahā Moggallāna replied: Friend Ānanda, listen while I tell you a parable. The wise, on hearing a parable, understand its implication. Friend Ānanda, it is like the flower of the cluster fig tree, which appears in the world in due time. Friend Ānanda, the Tathāgata, free from attachment and fully awakened, has likewise appeared in the world in due time. [Therefore], friend Ānanda, quickly become the attendant of the World-honored One, and you, [Ānanda of the] Gotama [clan], will acquire great fruit. Venerable Ānanda replied: Venerable Mahā Moggallāna, if the World-honored One grants me three wishes, I will become the Buddha’s attendant. What are the three? [First,] I wish not to wear robes, new or old, that [were given] to the Buddha. [Second,] I wish not [to eat] food that was prepared specially for the Buddha. [Third,] I wish not to see the Buddha at inappropriate times. Venerable Mahā Moggallāna, if the World-honored One grants me these three wishes, I will become the Buddha’s attendant. Then, having persuaded Venerable Ānanda to become the Buddha’s attendant, Venerable Mahā Moggallāna rose from his seat, circumambulated Venerable Ānanda, and returned. [He] approached the Buddha. After paying respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet and sitting down to one side, he said: World-honored One, I have persuaded the venerable friend Ānanda to become the Buddha’s attendant. World-honored One, the venerable friend Ānanda asks that the Buddha grant him three wishes. What are the three? [First,] he wishes not to wear robes, new or old, that [were given] to the Buddha. [Second,] he wishes not [to eat] food that was

prepared specially for the Buddha. [Third,] he wishes not to see the Buddha at inappropriate times. [Ānanda said to me:] “Venerable Mahā Moggallāna, if the World-honored One grants me these three wishes, I will become the Buddha’s attendant.”

The World-honored One said:

Mahā Moggallāna, the monk Ānanda is clever and wise. He foresees that there might be criticism from companions in the holy life, who might say, “The monk Ānanda attends on the World-honored One for the purpose of getting robes.” Mahā Moggallāna, that the monk Ānanda is clever and wise and foresees that there might be criticism from companions in the holy life, who might say, “The monk Ānanda attends on the World-honored One for the purpose of getting robes,” this is an extraordinary quality of the monk Ānanda. Mahā Moggallāna, the monk Ānanda is clever and wise. He fore sees that there might be criticism from companions in the holy life, who might say, “The monk Ānanda attends on the World-honored One for the purpose of getting food.” Mahā Moggallāna, that the monk Ānanda is clever and wise and foresees that there might be criticism from companions in the holy life, who might say, “The monk Ānanda attends on the World-honored One for the purpose of getting food,” this is an extraordinary quality of the monk Ānanda. Mahā Moggallāna, the monk Ānanda is skillful in knowing the [proper] time and in rightly discriminating the [proper] time. He knows when it is the proper time to visit the Tathāgata, and he knows when it is not the proper time to visit the Tathāgata; when it is the proper time for the assembly of monks or the assembly of nuns to visit the Tathāgata, and when it is not the proper time for the assembly of monks or the assembly of nuns to visit the Tathāgata; when it is the proper time for the assembly of laymen and laywomen to visit the Tathāgata, and when it is not the proper time for the assembly of laymen and lay women to visit the Tathāgata; when it is the proper time for the many non-Buddhist renunciants and brahmins to visit the Tathāgata, and

when it is not the proper time for the many non-Buddhist renunciants and brahmins to visit the Tathāgata. He knows whether one of the many non-Buddhist renunciants or brahmins is able to discuss with the Tathā gata, or if one of the many non-Buddhist renunciants or brahmins is not able to discuss with the Tathāgata. He knows which food, if eaten, savored, and digested by the Tathā gata, will bring him peace and well-being; and he knows which food, if eaten, savored, and digested by the Tathāgata, will not bring him peace and well-being. He knows which food, if eaten, savored, and digested by the Tathāgata, will cause him to teach the Dharma more eloquently; and he knows which food, if eaten, savored, and digested by the Tathāgata, will not cause him to teach the Dharma more elo quently. This is said to be an extraordinary quality of the monk Ānanda. Mahā Moggallāna, although the monk Ānanda does not possess the knowledge of others’ minds, he knows well that the Buddha would rise from sitting in meditation in the late afternoon to teach people, that such is the Tathāgata’s practice for today, or that such is the Tathā gata’s dwelling in happiness here and now. He speaks carefully, accord ing to what was said, speaking the truth and not otherwise. This is said to be an extraordinary quality of the monk Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda has said, “Venerable friends, I have been attend ing on the Buddha for twenty-five years, [but] that I for that reason might become conceited, that is not the case.” That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of the venerable Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda has also said, “Venerable friends, I have been attending on the Buddha for twenty-five years and I have never gone to see him at an improper time.” That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of the venerable Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda has also said, “Venerable friends, I have been attending on the Buddha for twenty-five years and I have never been scolded by the Buddha, except on one occasion, which was on account of someone else.” That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a dec laration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda.

Venerable Ānanda has also said, “Venerable friends, I have received eighty thousand teachings from the Tathāgata and have memorized them without forgetting them, [but] that for that reason I might become conceited, that is not the case.” That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda has also said, “Venerable friends, I have received eighty thousand teachings from the Tathāgata, and since the beginning I have never [needed to] ask [to hear them] again, except for one verse, and that was not an easy [verse to understand].” That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda has also said, “Venerable friends, I have received eighty thousand teachings from the Tathāgata, and since the beginning I have never looked to anyone else to receive teachings from.” That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda has also said, “Venerable friends, I have received eighty thousand teachings from the Tathāgata, and since the beginning I have never had the thought: ‘I am receiving these teachings so that I can teach them to others.’ Venerable friends, I simply wished to dis- cipline and calm myself in order to attain final nirvana.” That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraor- dinary quality of Venerable Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda has also said, “Venerable friends, it is most wonderful, most remarkable that the four assemblies come to me to listen to the Dharma, [but] that for that reason I might become conceited, that is not the case. I do not even anticipate: ‘[If] they come and put a question, I shall answer like this and like this.’ Rather, venerable friends, when seated [to teach], I [reply] in accordance with the meaning and with what is proper.” That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda has also said, “Venerable friends, it is most won- derful, most remarkable, that when the many non-Buddhist renunciants

or brahmins come to ask me questions, it is not the case that I should harbor any fear or apprehension, or that my body hairs should stand on end. I do not even anticipate: ‘[If] they come and put a question, I shall answer like this and like this.’ Rather, venerable friends, when seated [to teach], I [reply] in accordance with the meaning and with what is proper.” That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda. Again, at one time Venerable Sāriputta, Venerable Mahā Moggallāna, and Venerable Ānanda were staying on Mount Salaḷāgāra at Sāvatthī.^123 At that time, Venerable Sāriputta asked [Ānanda], “Friend Ānanda, during the twenty-five years of your attending on the World-honored One, do you remem ber desire ever arising in your mind?” Venerable Ānanda replied: “Venerable Sāriputta, I am [only] a disciple in higher training and have not abandoned desire.” Venerable Sāriputta again said: Friend Ānanda, I am not asking you if you are a disciple in higher training or one beyond training. Rather, I am asking you if you remem ber desire ever arising in your mind during the twenty-five years of your attending on the World-honored One. Venerable Sāriputta repeated the question three times: “Friend Ānanda, during the twenty-five years of your attending on the World-honored One, do you remember desire ever arising in your mind?” And three times the venerable Ānanda gave the same answer: “Venerable Sāriputta, I am [only] a disciple in higher training and have not abandoned desire.” Venerable Sāriputta again said: Friend Ānanda, I am not asking you if you are a disciple in higher training or one beyond training. Rather, I am asking you if you remem ber desire ever arising in your mind during the twenty-five years of your attending on the World-honored One. Then Venerable Mahā Moggallāna said: “Friend Ānanda, answer the question right away! Answer the question right away! Do not trouble the most highly regarded elder.”

Then, Venerable Ānanda replied: Venerable Sāriputta, from the beginning of the twenty-five years of my attending on the World-honored One I do not remember desire ever arising in my mind. Why is that? [Because] I always had shame and scruple when approaching the Buddha and my wise companions in the holy life. That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda.

Again, at one time the World-honored One was staying on Mount Vulture Peak near Rājagaha. At that time, the World-honored One told Ānanda: “Ānanda, when you lie down, you should practice the lion’s way of lying down.” Venerable Ānanda responded: “World-honored One, what is the way of lying down of the lion, king of animals?” The World-honored One replied: Ānanda, the lion, king of animals, after searching for food during the day, enters a cave to sleep. When it wants to sleep, it puts one leg on the other with tail stretched behind and lies down on its right side. In the morning, when the night is over, it inspects its own body. If the lion, king of animals, sees that its body is not straight, then it is not happy. If the lion, king of animals, sees that its body is straight, then it is happy. After rising from lying down, it goes out of the cave and growls several times. Having growled several times, it inspects its own body again. Having inspected its own body, it looks around to the four directions. Having looked around to the four directions, it roars three times and then goes out to search for food. Such is the way of lying down of the lion, king of animals. Then the venerable Ānanda said: “World-honored One, if such is the way of lying down of the lion, king of animals, what is a monk’s way of lying down?” The World-honored One replied: Ānanda, when a monk is living in dependence on a village or town, in the early morning, when the night is over, he puts on his robes, takes

his almsbowl, and then enters the village to beg for food, with his body well protected, his senses guarded, and right mindfulness established. Having finished begging for food in the village or town, [and eaten his meal], he puts away his robes and bowl, washes his hands and feet, and then goes to a secluded place, taking a sitting mat with him on his shoulder. He walks or sits in meditation under a tree or in an empty hut, purifying the mind of any hindrance. Having spent the day practicing walking or sitting meditation to purify the mind of any hindrance, in the first watch of the night he again practices walking or sitting med itation to purify the mind of any hindrance. Having practiced walking or sitting meditation to purify the mind of any hindrance during the first watch of the night, in the middle watch of the night he enters a hut to sleep. He folds his upper robe in four and places it on the bed, and he folds his outer robe to make a pillow. He lies down on his right side, placing one leg on the other, con stantly maintaining clarity of perception, right mindfulness, and right attentiveness in his mind, and continuously aware of the thought of getting up [at the proper time]. In the last watch of the night, he gets up to practice walking or sitting meditation to purify the mind from any hindrance. This is how a monk lies down according to the way of the lion. Venerable Ānanda said: “World-honored One, this is [indeed] how a monk lies down according to the way of the lion.” Venerable Ānanda [later] used to say: Venerable friends, from the time the World-honored One taught me the analogy of the lion’s way of lying down, I have never slept on my left side. That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda. Again, at one time the World-honored One was staying in the sāla tree grove of the Kusināra Mallas, called Upavattana. At that time the World honored One, who was about to attain final nirvana, said:

Ānanda, go to the place between the twin _sāla_ trees and arrange a bed for the Tathāgata, with the head facing north. The Tathāgata will attain final nirvana during the middle watch of the night. Having received the Tathāgata’s instruction, Venerable Ānanda went to the twin [ _sāla_ ] trees. Between the twin trees, [he] arranged a bed for the Tathāgata, with the head facing north. Having arranged the bed, [he] returned to the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stood to one side, and said:

World-honored One, I have arranged a bed for the Tathāgata, between the twin [ _sāla_ ] trees with the head facing north. May the World-honored One himself know the proper time. Then the World-honored One bade Venerable Ānanda take him to [the place] between the twin _sāla_ trees. [The Buddha] folded his upper robe in four, spread it on the bed, folded his outer robe to make a pillow, and then lay down on his right side with one foot on the other. In the last moments [before] the Buddha’s final nirvana Venerable Ānanda, who had been attending on the Buddha [standing behind him] with a fly whisk in hand, was wiping away tears with his hand, thinking:

Formerly assemblies of monks from all directions came, wishing to see the World-honored One, serve him, and pay respect to him. All of them could, at any time, see the World-honored One, serve him, and pay respect to him. But when they hear that the World-honored One has attained final nirvana, they will no longer come to see the World- honored One, serve him, and pay respect to him. And I too will no longer be able to see the Buddha at any time, to serve him, and pay respect to him. Then the World-honored One asked the monks, “Where is the monk Ānanda now?” The monks said: World-honored One, Venerable Ānanda, who is attending on the Buddha [standing behind you] with a fly whisk in hand, is wiping away tears with his hand, thinking, “Formerly assemblies of monks

from all directions came, wishing to see the World-honored One, serve him, and pay respect to him. All of them could, at any time, see the World-honored One, serve him, and pay respect to him. But when they hear that the World-honored One has attained final nirvana, they will no longer come to see the World-honored One, serve him, and pay respect to him. And I too will no longer be able to see the Buddha at any time, to serve him, and pay respect to him.” Then the World-honored One said: Ānanda! Do not weep! Do not grieve! Why is that? Ānanda, you have attended on me respectfully, practicing loving-kindness in your bodily action, speech, and thoughts wholeheartedly from the beginning, and you have ensured my happiness and comfort without measure, without boundary, without limit. Ānanda, as for Tathāgatas of the past, free from attachment and fully awakened, [whatever] attendants they had, none of them surpassed you. Ānanda, as for Tathāgatas of the future, free from attachment and fully awakened, [whatever] attendants they will have, none of them will surpass you. Ānanda, as for myself, the Tathāgata of the present, free from attachment and fully awakened, [whatever] attendants I have had, none of them has surpassed you. Why is that? [Because you,] Ānanda, are skillful in knowing the [proper] time and in rightly discriminating the [proper] time. You know when it is the proper time to visit the Tathāgata and you know when it is not the proper time to visit the Tathāgata; when it is the proper time for the assembly of monks or the assembly of nuns to visit the Tathāgata and when it is not the proper time for the assembly of monks or the assembly of nuns to visit the Tathāgata; when it is the proper time for the assembly of laymen and laywomen to visit the Tathāgata and when it is not the proper time for the assembly of laymen and lay women to visit the Tathāgata; when it is the proper time for the many non-Buddhist renunciants and brahmins to visit the Tathāgata and when it is not the proper time for the many non-Buddhist renunciants and brahmins to visit the Tathāgata.

You know whether one of the many non-Buddhist renunciants or brahmins is able to discuss with the Tathāgata, or if one of the many non-Buddhist renunciants or brahmins, is not able to discuss with the Tathāgata. You know which food, if eaten, savored, and digested by the Tathā- gata, will bring him peace and well-being; and you know which food, if eaten, savored, and digested by the Tathāgata, will not bring him peace and well-being. You know which food, if eaten, savored, and digested by the Tathāgata, will cause him to teach the Dharma more eloquently; and you know which food, if eaten, savored, and digested by the Tathā- gata, will not cause him to teach the Dharma more eloquently. Moreover, Ānanda, although you do not possess the knowledge of others’ minds, you know well that the Buddha would rise from sitting in meditation in the late afternoon to teach people, that such is the Tathāgata’s practice for today, or that such is the Tathāgata’s dwelling in happiness here and now. You speak carefully according to what was said, speaking the truth and not otherwise. Then, intending to make the venerable Ānanda happy, the World-honored One told the monks:

A wheel-turning monarch possesses four extraordinary qualities. What are the four? When an assembly of khattiya s goes to visit the wheel-turning monarch, then if he is silent, they are delighted at the sight of him; and if he speaks, they are delighted to hear him. When an assembly of brahmins... of householders... of renunciants goes to visit the wheel-turning monarch, then if he is silent, they are delighted at the sight of him; and if he speaks, they are delighted to hear him. The monk Ānanda likewise possesses four extraordinary qualities. What are the four? When an assembly of monks goes to visit Ānanda, then if he is silent, they are delighted at the mere sight of him; and if he speaks, they are delighted to hear [what he says]. When an assembly of nuns... of laymen... of laywomen goes to visit Ānanda, then if he is silent, they are delighted at the mere sight of him; and if he speaks, they are delighted to hear [what he says].

Moreover, when Ānanda teaches the Dharma to an assembly, there are four extraordinary qualities [in his teaching]. What are the four? The monk Ānanda teaches the Dharma to an assembly of monks wholeheartedly, not otherwise. And, the assembly of monks thinks, “May Venerable Ānanda continue to teach the Dharma. May he not stop [teaching] midway.” The assembly of monks never grows tired of his teaching the Dharma until the monk Ānanda becomes silent of his own accord. He teaches the Dharma to an assembly of nuns... of laymen... of laywomen wholeheartedly, not otherwise. And they think, “May Venerable Ānanda continue to teach the Dharma. May he not stop [teaching] midway.” The assembly of laywomen never grows tired of his teaching the Dharma until Venerable Ānanda becomes silent of his own accord. Again, at one time, not long after the Buddha had attained final nirvana, Venerable Ānanda was dwelling among the Vajjīs, in a village of the Vajjīs. At that time, Venerable Ānanda was teaching the Dharma, surrounded by countless hundreds and thousands of people. Venerable Vajjiputta was also among the assembly. Venerable Vajjiputta thought to himself:

Is this venerable Ānanda a disciple in higher training and has not yet abandoned desire? Let me enter samādhi such that I [can] examine the venerable Ānanda’s mind. Then Venerable Vajjiputta entered samādhi such that he [could] examine the mind of Venerable Ānanda. By this means Venerable Vajjiputta knew that Venerable Ānanda was still a disciple in higher training and had not yet abandoned desire. Venerable Vajjiputta then rose from samādhi and uttered a verse to Venerable Ānanda:

Mountains and forest calm the thoughts And make nirvana enter the mind. [If you], [Ānanda] Gotama, meditate without distraction, Soon [you] will realize the path of peace.

Then Venerable Ānanda, having received the instruction given by Ven- erable Vajjiputta, left the crowd to live in solitude and to practice diligently without being distracted. Having left the crowd to live in solitude and to practice diligently without being distracted, he attained fully the summit of the holy life, for the sake of which a clansman shaves off his hair and beard, dons the yellow robe, leaves home out of faith, and goes forth to practice the path. In this very life, he personally attained understanding and awakening, and dwelled having personally realized. He knew as it really was: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what was to be done has been done. There will not be another existence.” Venerable Ānanda had come to know the Dharma... (and so on up to)... attained arahantship. Venerable Ānanda said:

Venerable friends, when I was sitting on the bed and was about to lie down, just as my head was about to touch the pillow, all the taints were eradicated and I attained liberation of the mind. That Venerable Ānanda [is able to] make such a declaration, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda. Venerable Ānanda also said, “Venerable friends, I shall attain final nirvana sitting cross-legged.” Then Venerable Ānanda sat cross-legged and attained final nirvana. That Venerable Ānanda sat cross-legged to attain final nirvana, this is said to be an extraordinary quality of Venerable Ānanda.

This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma33-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M iii 144 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA33]]
> ◄  [[ma32-bdk]] 📜  [[ma34-bdk]] ►
