---
sutta_code: "MA37"
sutta_title:
  - "Devadūta Sutta "
  - "Messengers of the Gods"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA37]]
> ◄  [[ma36-bdk]] 📜  [[ma38-bdk]] ►

### 37. The Discourse at Campā

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was living at Campā near the Gaggarā Lake. At that time, on the fifteenth day of the [half-]month, the day for reciting the code of rules, the World-honored One sat down on a seat prepared in front of the assembly of monks. After sitting down, the World-honored One entered samādhi and through the knowledge of others’ minds he surveyed the minds of [the monks in] the assembly. After surveying the minds of [the monks in] the assembly, he sat silently through the first watch of the night. Then a certain monk got up from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder and, placing his palms together [in respect] toward the Buddha, said:

World-honored One, the first watch of the night has ended. It has been a long time since the Buddha and the assembly of monks gathered and sat down here. May the World-honored One recite the code of rules! At that time, the World-honored One remained silent and made no response. Then the World-honored One continued to sit silently up to the middle watch of the night. That monk again got up from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder and, placing his palms together [in respect] toward the Buddha, said:

World-honored One, the first watch of the night is over, the middle watch of the night is coming to an end. It has been a long time since the Buddha and the assembly of monks gathered and sat down here. May the World-honored One recite the code of rules! At that time, the World-honored One again remained silent and made no response. Then the World-honored One continued to sit silently up to the last watch of the night. A third time that monk got up from his seat, arranged his robe

so as to bare one shoulder and, placing his palms together [in respect] toward the Buddha, said:

World-honored One, the first watch of the night has already ended, the middle watch of the night, too, has ended, and the last watch of the night is about to end. It is getting close to dawn; soon the dawn will come. It has been a very long time since the Buddha and the assembly of monks gathered and sat down here. May the World-honored One recite the code of rules! Then the World-honored One said to that monk, “Among this assembly there is one monk who is impure.” At that time Venerable Mahā Moggallāna was also among the assembly. Then Venerable Mahā Moggallāna had this thought:

In regard to which monk did the World-honored One say that among this assembly there is one monk who is impure? Let me enter concen- tration such that, through the knowledge of others’ minds, I [can] survey the minds of the [monks in the] assembly. Venerable Mahā Moggallāna then entered samādhi such that, through the knowledge of others’ minds, he [could] survey the minds of the [monks in the] assembly. Then Venerable Mahā Moggallāna came to know the monk in regard to whom the World-honored One had said “Among this assembly there is one monk who is impure.” Then Venerable Mahā Moggallāna emerged from samādhi, went right in front of that monk, pulled him by the arm, opened the door, and thrust him outside, [saying]: “You fool, go far away, do not stay here. You are not allowed to gather again with the assembly of monks. Henceforth you are no longer a monk.” Venerable Mahā Moggallānathen bolted the door and returned to where the Buddha was. Paying respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet, he stood to one side and said:

The monk in regard to whom the World-honored One had said “Among this assembly there is one monk who is impure” has been expelled by me.

World-honored One, the first watch of the night has already ended, the middle watch of the night, too, has ended, and the last watch of the night is about to end. It is getting close to dawn; soon the dawn will come. It has been a very long time since the Buddha and the assembly of monks gathered and sat down here. May the World-honored One recite the code of rules! The World-honored One spoke thus: Mahā Moggallāna, that foolish man committed a serious offense in troubling the World-honored One and the assembly of monks. Mahā Moggallāna, whoever is responsible for the Tathāgata reciting the code of rules in an assembly that is not pure, his head shall split into seven pieces. Therefore, Mahā Moggallāna, henceforth you may recite the code of rules [without me]. The Tathāgata will not recite the code of rules again. Why is that? Mahā Moggallāna, just as from the bottom to the surface the ocean becomes gradually greater in circumference, evenly and uniformly increasing up to the shore; and just as its water is always full but never overflowing, similarly, Mahā Moggallāna, my true teach ing and discipline is [to be] gradually practiced, gradually trained in, gradually completed, and gradually taught. Mahā Moggallāna, that my true teaching and discipline is [to be] gradually practiced, gradually trained in, gradually completed, and gradually taught—this is said to be an extraordinary quality of my true teaching and discipline. Again, Mahā Moggallāna, just as the ocean’s tide is never out of time, similarly, Mahā Moggallāna, in my true teaching and discipline, the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen will never, until the end of their lives, break the precepts, which I have established for these clans people. Mahā Moggallāna, that in my true teaching and discipline, the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen will never, until the end of their lives, break the precepts, which I have established for these clans men—this is said to be an extraordinary quality of my true teaching and discipline.

Again, Mahā Moggallāna, just as the water of the ocean is very deep, bottomless, and extremely broad, boundless, similarly, Mahā Moggallāna, in my true teaching and discipline, the teachings are very deep, deep and bottomless, extremely broad and boundless. Mahā Moggallāna, that in my true teaching and discipline, the teachings are very deep, deep and bottomless, extremely broad and boundless—this is said to be an extraordinary quality of my true teach- ing and discipline. Again, Mahā Moggallāna, just as the water of the ocean is salty, having everywhere the same taste, similarly, Mahā Moggallāna, my true teaching and discipline has the taste of dispassion, the taste of awakening, the taste of tranquility, as well as the taste of the path. Mahā Moggallāna, that my true teaching and discipline has the taste of dispassion, the taste of awakening, the taste of tranquility, as well as of the taste of the path—this is said to be an extraordinary quality of my true teaching and discipline. Again, Mahā Moggallāna, just as the ocean abounds with treasures, countless precious things, and many varieties of exotic gems, being full of precious materials, such as gold, silver, crystal, beryl, precious stone, pearl, green jade, white jade, conch shell, coral, amber, agate, tortoise shell, ruby, and stone-beads, similarly, Mahā Moggallāna, my true teaching and discipline abounds with treasures, countless precious things, and many varieties of “exotic gems,” such as the four estab- lishments of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of super- normal power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of awakening, and the eightfold noble path. Mahā Moggallāna, that my true teaching and discipline abounds with treasures, countless precious things, and many varieties of “exotic gems,” such as the four establishments of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of supernormal power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of awakening, and the eightfold noble path—this is said to be an extraordinary quality of my true teaching and discipline. Again, Mahā Moggallāna, just as the ocean is the abode of mighty deities, namely _asura_ s, _gandhabba_ s, _rakkhasa_ s, _makara_ s, tortoises,

crocodiles, vāruṇī serpents, and [other, huge fishlike creatures such as] timi s, timingala s, and timitimingala s; and just as in the ocean dwell most wonderful and most remarkable beings with bodies as long as one hundred leagues, two hundred leagues, up to three hundred leagues, or even up to seven hundred leagues, creatures [with such] bodies all living in the ocean, similarly, Mahā Moggallāna, in my true teaching and discipline there is the community of nobles, of great spiritual beings all dwelling within it, namely arahants, those who are on the path to arahantship, non-returners, those who are on the path to non-returning, once-returners, those who are on the path to once-returning, stream enterers, and those who are on the path to stream-entry. Mahā Moggallāna, that in my true teaching and discipline there is the community of nobles, of great spiritual beings that all dwell within it, namely arahants, those who are on the path to arahantship, non-returners, those who are on the path to non-returning, once-return ers, those who are on the path to once-returning, stream-enterers, and those who are on the path to stream-entry—this is said to be an extraor dinary quality of my true teaching and discipline. Again, Mahā Moggallāna, just as the ocean is pure and does not accept corpses, and if someone dies in the ocean, the body is blown by the wind and thrown up on the shore overnight, similarly, Mahā Mog gallāna, in my true teaching and discipline, the noble assembly is pure; it does not accept “corpses.” If there are those who are without vigor, wicked, fake celibates though professing to be celibates, fake renunciants though professing to be renunciants, then even though they may be in the midst of the community of nobles, they are far away from the com munity of nobles and the community of nobles is far away from them. Mahā Moggallāna, that in my true teaching and discipline, the noble assembly is pure and does not accept “corpses”; that if there are those who are without vigor, wicked, fake celibates though professing to be celibates, fake renunciants though professing to be renunciants who, even though they may be in the midst of the community of nobles, are far away from the community of nobles and the community of nobles is far away from them—this is said to be an extraordinary quality of my true teaching and discipline.

Again, Mahā Moggallāna, just as there are five large rivers of Jam budīpa that enter the ocean, namely the Ganges, the Yamunā, the Sarabhū, the Aciravatī, and the Mahī, that all enter the great ocean, together with the water that the ocean dragon sends raining down from the sky, [relentlessly] as the [turning of the] axle caps [on a chariot],^128 all this water cannot increase or diminish the ocean; similarly, Mahā Moggallāna, in my true teaching and discipline, the khattiya clansmen who shave off hair and beards, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path, come to abide in unshakeable liberation of the mind, having accomplished realization by themselves, [yet], Mahā Moggallāna, the unshakeable liberation of the mind in my true teaching and discipline neither increases nor diminishes. In the same way, the brahmins... the householders... the workers who shave off hair and beards, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path, come to abide in unshakeable liberation of the mind, having accomplished realization by themselves, [yet], Mahā Moggallāna, the unshakeable liberation of the mind in my true teaching and discipline neither increases nor diminishes. Mahā Moggallāna, that in my true teaching and discipline, the khattiya clansmen who shave off hair and beards, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path, come to abide in unshakeable liberation of the mind, having accomplished realization by themselves, [yet], Mahā Moggallāna, the unshakeable liberation of the mind in my true teaching and discipline neither increases nor dimin ishes; [and that] in the same way the brahmins... the householders.

.. the workers who shave off hair and beards, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path, come to abide in unshakeable liberation of the mind, having accomplished realization by themselves, [yet], Mahā Moggallāna, the unshakeable liberation of the mind in my true teaching and discipline neither increases nor dimin- ishes—this is said to be an extraordinary quality of my true teaching and discipline. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Ven- erable Mahā Moggallāna and the [other] monks were delighted and remem- bered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma37-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA48.2]] | M iii 178 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA37]]
> ◄  [[ma36-bdk]] 📜  [[ma38-bdk]] ►
