---
sutta_code: "MA40"
sutta_title:
  - "手長者 "
  - "Hatthaka Householder"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA40]]
> ◄  [[ma39-bdk]] 📜  [[ma41-bdk]] ►

### 40. The Discourse to the Householder Hatthaka

Thus have I heard: At one time, the Buddha was staying at Aggāḷava near Āḷavī, in a rosewood grove. At that time the householder Hatthaka, accompanied by five hundred eminent householders, went to the Buddha. He paid respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet and sat down to one side. The five hundred householders also paid respect with their heads at the Buddha’s feet and sat down to one side. The World-honored One said, “Householder Hatthaka, now you are with such a great assembly. With what qualities are you [able to] gather such a great assembly?” Then the householder Hatthaka replied: World-honored One, there are four qualities for gathering people taught by the World-honored One. Charitable giving is the first, speaking friendly words is the second, providing helpful advice is the third, and being impartial is the fourth.^131 World-honored One, I [am able] to gather such a great assembly by charitable giving, or by speaking friendly words, or by providing helpful advice, or by being impartial. The World-honored One spoke in praise: Very good! Very good! Householder Hatthaka, you [are able] to gather such a great assembly in accordance with the Dharma, to gather such a great assembly by appropriate means, to gather such a great assembly through proper causes and conditions. Householder Hatthaka, renunciants or brahmins in the past, who gathered a great assembly in accordance with the Dharma, all used these four qualities, or some of them, to gather a great assembly. Householder Hatthaka, renunciants or brahmins in the future, who will gather a great assembly in accordance with the Dharma, will all use these four qualities, or some of them, to gather a great assembly.

Householder Hatthaka, renunciants or brahmins in the present, who gather a great assembly in accordance with the Dharma, all use these four qualities, or some of them, to gather a great assembly. Then the World-honored One taught the Dharma to the householder Hatthaka, exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him. Having used countless skillful means to teach him the Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him, [the Buddha] remained silent. Then the householder Hatthaka, having been taught the Dharma by the Buddha, having been exhorted, encouraged, and delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance to the Buddha, and after circumambulating the Buddha three times, departed and returned home. On arriving at the outer gate, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. On arriving at the middle gate or the inner gate, or on arriving inside, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. Then he ascended to the hall, arranged a seat, and sat down cross-legged. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwelled pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity; free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world with a well-developed [mind], boundless and exalted, immeasurable. At that time, gathering in the Sudhamma Hall,^132 the thirty-three gods extolled and praised the householder Hatthaka, saying:

Good friends, the householder Hatthaka possesses great benefits and great merit. Why is that? The householder Hatthaka, having been taught the Dharma by the Buddha, having been exhorted, encouraged, and

delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance to the Buddha, and after circumambulating the Buddha three times, departed and returned home. On arriving at the outer gate, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. On arriving at the middle gate or the inner gate, or on arriving inside, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. Then he ascended to the hall, arranged a seat, and sat down cross- legged. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwelled pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity; free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. Then when the night was about to turn to dawn, the great heavenly king Vessavaṇa, of lofty appearance and radiant aura, approached the householder Hatthaka and said:

Householder, you have great benefits and great merit. Why is that? Today on account of you the thirty-three gods gathered in the Sudhamma Hall, extolling and praising you thus: The householder Hatthaka has great benefits and great merit. Why is that? Good friends, the householder Hatthaka, having been taught the Dharma by the Buddha, having been exhorted, encouraged, and delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance to the Buddha, and after circumambulating the Buddha three times, departed and returned home.

On arriving at the outer gate, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. On arriving at the middle gate or the inner gate, or on arriving inside, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. Then he ascended to the hall, arranged a seat, and sat down cross-legged. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwelled pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeas- urable, and well cultivated. “In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity; free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. At that time the householder Hatthaka remained silent, he did not speak and did not look or glance at the great heavenly king, Vessavaṇa. Why was that? Out of respect for his samādhi, to guard his samādhi. At that time, the World-honored One praised the householder Hatthaka in an immeasurable assembly of hundreds and thousands of people, saying:

The householder Hatthaka possesses seven marvelous and wonderful qualities. The householder Hatthaka, having been taught the Dharma by me, having been exhorted, encouraged, and delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance to me, and after circumambulating me three times, departed and returned home. On arriving at the outer gate, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach them the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. On arriving at the middle gate or the inner gate, or on arriving

inside, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach them the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. Then he ascended to the hall, arranged a seat and sat down cross- legged. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwelled pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity; free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. Today on account of him the thirty-three gods gathered in the Sudhamma Hall, extolling and praising him thus: The householder Hatthaka has great benefits and great merit. Why is that? Good friends, the householder Hatthaka, having been taught the Dharma by the Buddha, having been exhorted, encouraged, and delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance to the Buddha, and after circumambulating the Buddha three times, departed and returned home. On arriving at the outer gate, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. On arriving at the middle gate or the inner gate, or on arriving inside, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. Then he ascended to the hall, arranged a seat, and sat down cross-legged. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwelled pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around,

everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled per vading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable and well cultivated. In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity, free from fetters or resent ment, without ill-will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated.

Then when the night was about to turn to dawn, the great heavenly king Vessavaṇa, of lofty appearance and radiant aura, approached the householder Hatthaka and said:

Householder, you have great benefits and great merit. Why is that? Today on account of you the thirty-three gods gathered in the Sudhamma Hall, extolling and praising you thus, “The householder Hatthaka has great benefits and great merit. “Why is that? Good friends, the householder Hatthaka, having been taught the Dharma by the Buddha, having been exhorted, encouraged, and delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance to the Buddha, and after circumambulating the Buddha three times, departed and returned home. “On arriving at the outer gate, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. On arriving at the middle gate or the inner gate, or on arriving inside, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. “Then he ascended to the hall, arranged a seat, and sat down cross-legged. “With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwelled per vading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will

or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable and well cultivated. “In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity; free from fetters or resent ment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated.” Then at dawn, when the night was over, a certain monk put on his robes, took his almsbowl, and went to the house of the householder Hatthaka. Seeing that monk coming from afar, the householder Hatthaka rose from his seat. Placing his palms together [in respect] toward the monk, he said, “Welcome, venerable sir! The venerable one has not come here for a long time. Please take a seat on this bed.” Then the monk took a seat on the bed. The householder Hatthaka paid respect with his head at the monk’s feet and sat down to one side. The monk said: Householder, you have great benefits and great merit. Why is that? In an assembly of countless hundreds and thousands of people the World-honored One praised you saying, “The householder Hatthaka possesses seven extraordinary qualities. “The householder Hatthaka, having been taught the Dharma by me, having been exhorted, encouraged, and delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance to me, and after circumambulating me three times, departed and returned home. On arriving at the outer gate, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. On arriving at the middle gate or the inner gate, or on arriving inside, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. “Then he ascended to the hall, arranged a seat, and sat down cross-legged. “With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwelled per vading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and

below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving- kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] bound- less, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. “In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity; free from fetters or resent- ment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. “Today on account of him the thirty-three gods gathered in the Sudhamma Hall, extolling and praising you thus, ‘The house- holder Hatthaka has great benefits and great merit. Why is that? Good friends, the householder Hatthaka, having been taught the Dharma by the Buddha, having been exhorted, encouraged, and delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance to the Buddha, and after circumambulating the Buddha three times, departed and returned home. ‘On arriving at the outer gate, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. On arriving at the middle gate or the inner gate, or on arriving inside, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach that person the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. ‘Then he ascended to the hall, arranged a seat, and sat down cross-legged. ‘With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwelled per- vading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving- kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] bound- less, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. ‘In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity; free from fetters or resent- ment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire

world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated.’ “Then when the night was about to turn to dawn, the great heavenly king Vessavaṇa, of lofty appearance and radiant aura, approached the householder Hatthaka and said:‘Householder, you have great benefits and great merit. Why is that? Today on account of you the thirty-three gods gathered in the Sudhamma Hall, extolling and praising you thus, “The householder Hatthaka has great benefits and great merit. ‘Why is that? Good friends, the householder Hatthaka, having been taught the Dharma by the Buddha, having been exhorted, encouraged, and delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance to the Buddha, and after circumambulating the Buddha three times, departed and returned home. ‘On arriving at the outer gate, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach them the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. On arriving at the middle gate or the inner gate, or on arriving inside, if there was someone there, he made every effort to teach them the Dharma, to exhort, encourage, and delight them. ‘Then he ascended to the hall, arranged a seat, and sat down cross-legged. ‘With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, he dwelled per vading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth direction, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] bound less, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. ‘In the same way, with a mind imbued with compassion... with empathic joy... with equanimity; free from fetters or resent ment, without ill will or quarrel, he dwelled pervading the entire world [with a mind that is] boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated.’”

“At that time the householder Hatthaka remained silent, he did not speak and did not look or glance at the great heavenly king, Vessavaṇa. Why is that? Out of respect for his samādhi, to guard his concen- tration.” Then the householder Hatthaka said to the monk, “Venerable sir, at that time [when the Buddha praised me thus] were there any laypeople present?” The monk replied, “No, there were no laypeople present,” and asked, “What fault would there be if there were laypeople present?” The householder answered: Venerable sir, if there had been those who had no faith in what the World-honored One said, they would for a long time derive no benefit from it, be unable to accept it, and would be reborn into an extremely bad realm of existence, experiencing immeasurable suffering. If there had been those who did have faith in what the World-honored One said, on that account they might have come to esteem, venerate, and pay respect to me. [But], venerable sir, I do not desire that they should [act] like that either. Venerable sir, please take your meal here.

For the householder Hatthaka’s sake, the monk accepted the invitation by remaining silent. Understanding that the monk had accepted his invitation by remaining silent, the householder Hatthaka arose from his seat, and personally prepared water for washing. With his own hands he prepared assorted pure and tasty dishes to eat, savor, and digest, making sure there was enough to eat. After [the monk] had fin- ished eating, put aside his bowl, and washed his hands, [Hatthaka] took a low seat and sat to one side to listen to the Dharma. The monk taught the householder the Dharma, exhorted, encour- aged, and delighted him. Having, with countless skillful means, taught him the Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him, [the monk] arose from his seat and departed. He approached the Buddha. Paying respect with his head at [the Buddha’s] feet, he sat down to one side and reported in detail the conversation he had had with the house- holder Hatthaka.

Then the World-honored One told the monks: For this reason I extolled the householder Hatthaka, [saying] that he possesses seven extraordinary qualities. Moreover, you should know that the householder Hatthaka possesses an eighth extraordinary quality. The householder Hatthaka seeks nothing and desires nothing. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma40-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[JA539]], [[SN4.18]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.256]], [[AN4.32]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA40]]
> ◄  [[ma39-bdk]] 📜  [[ma41-bdk]] ►
