---
sutta_code: "MA54"
sutta_title:
  - "盡智 "
  - "Wisdom of Cessation [of the Taints]"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA54]]
> ◄  [[ma53-bdk]] 📜  [[ma55-bdk]] ►

### 54. The Discourse on [Attaining the] Wisdom of Cessation [of the Taints]

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying among the Kurus, in the Kuru city of Kammāsadhamma. At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks: With knowledge and vision one can attain cessation of the taints, not without knowledge and without vision. How does one attain cessation of the taints by knowledge and vision? By knowing and seeing suffering as it really is, one attains cessation of the taints. By knowing and seeing, as it really is, the origin of suffering, the ending of suffering, and the path to the ending of suffering one attains cessation of the taints. The wisdom of cessation [of the taints] is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is the wisdom of cessation [of the taints] conditioned? The answer is: the wisdom of cessation [of the taints] is conditioned by liberation. Liberation too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is liberation conditioned? The answer is: liberation is conditioned by dispassion. Dispassion too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is dispassion conditioned? The answer is: dispassion is conditioned by disenchantment. Disenchantment too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is disenchantment conditioned? The answer is: disenchantment is conditioned by seeing and knowing things as they really are. Seeing and knowing things as they really are is conditioned too; it is not without conditions. By what is seeing and knowing things as they really are conditioned? The answer is: seeing and knowing things as they really are is conditioned by samādhi. samādhi too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is samādhi conditioned? The answer is: samādhi is conditioned by happiness.

Happiness too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is happiness conditioned? The answer is: happiness is conditioned by tranquility. Tranquility too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is tranquility conditioned? The answer is: tranquility is conditioned by rapture. Rapture too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is rapture conditioned? The answer is: rapture is conditioned by joy. Joy too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is joy conditioned? The answer is: joy is conditioned by being without regret. Being without regret too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is being without regret conditioned? The answer is: being without regret is conditioned by keeping the precepts. Keeping the precepts too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is keeping the precepts conditioned? The answer is: keeping the precepts is conditioned by guarding the sense faculties. Guarding the sense faculties too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is guarding the sense faculties conditioned? The answer is: guarding the sense faculties is conditioned by right mind fulness and right attentiveness. Right mindfulness and right attentiveness too are conditioned; they are not without conditions. By what are right mindfulness and right attentiveness conditioned? The answer is: right mindfulness and right attentiveness are conditioned by right attention. Right attention too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is right attention conditioned? The answer is: right attention is conditioned by faith. Faith too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is faith conditioned? The answer is: faith is conditioned by accepting the Dharma through reflection.^147 Accepting the Dharma through reflection too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is accepting the Dharma through reflec tion conditioned? The answer is: accepting the Dharma through reflec tion is conditioned by recitation of the Dharma.

Recitation of the Dharma too is conditioned; it is not without con- ditions. By what is recitation of the Dharma conditioned? The answer is: recitation of the Dharma is conditioned by memorizing the Dharma. Memorizing the Dharma too is conditioned; it is not without con- ditions. By what is memorizing the Dharma conditioned? The answer is: memorizing the Dharma is conditioned by reflecting on its meaning. Reflecting on the meaning of the Dharma too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is reflecting on its meaning con- ditioned? The answer is: reflecting on its meaning is conditioned by hearing. Hearing too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is hearing conditioned? The answer is: hearing is conditioned by lis- tening to the true Dharma. Listening to the true Dharma too is conditioned; it is not without conditions. By what is listening to the true Dharma conditioned? The answer is: listening to the true Dharma is conditioned by approaching [a teacher]. Approaching [a teacher] too is conditioned; it is not without con- ditions. By what is approaching [a teacher] conditioned? The answer is: approaching [a teacher] is conditioned by having respect. If one has respect for good friends, one hears what one has not heard before, and having heard it, benefits from it. If there are good friends, but one does not have respect for them, then this is detrimental to having respect. Lack of having respect is detrimental to approaching [a teacher]. Lack of approaching [a teacher] is detrimental to listening to the true Dharma. Lack of listening to the true Dharma is detrimental to hearing. Lack of hearing is detrimental to reflecting on the meaning of the Dharma. Lack of reflecting on the meaning of the Dharma is detrimental to memorizing the Dharma. Lack of memorizing the Dharma is detri- mental to recitation of the Dharma. Lack of recitation of the Dharma is detrimental to acceptance of the Dharma through reflection. Lack of acceptance of the Dharma through reflection is detrimental to faith. Lack of faith is detrimental to right attention. Lack of right attention

is detrimental to right mindfulness and right attentiveness. Lack of right mindfulness and right attentiveness is detrimental to the conditions for guarding the sense faculties, for keeping the precepts, for being without regret, for experiencing joy, rapture, tranquility, happiness, samādhi, for seeing and knowing things as they really are, for disenchantment, dispassion, and liberation. And lack of liberation is detrimental to the condition for the wisdom of cessation [of the taints]. If, [however,] one has respect for good friends, then one hears what one has not heard before, and having heard it, benefits from it. Therefore, if one has respect for them, the condition of having respect exists. If there is respect, the condition for approaching [a teacher] exists. If there is approaching [a teacher], the condition for listening to the true Dharma exists. If there is listening to the true Dharma, the condition for hearing exists. If there is hearing, the condition for reflect ing on the meaning of the Dharma exists. If there is reflection on the meaning of the Dharma, the condition for memorizing the Dharma exists. If there is memorization of the Dharma, the condition for reciting it exists. If there is recitation of the Dharma, the condition for accepting the Dharma through reflection exists. If there is acceptance of the Dharma through reflection, the condition for faith exists. If there is faith, the condition for right attention exists. If there is right attention, the condition for right mindfulness and right attentiveness exists. If there are right mindfulness and right attentiveness, the conditions exist for guarding the sense faculties, for keeping the precepts, for being without regret, for experiencing joy, rapture, tranquility, happiness, samādhi, for seeing and knowing things as they really are, for disenchantment, dispassion, and liberation. And if there is liberation, the condition exists for the wisdom of cessation [of the taints]. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma54-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA42]], [[MA43]], [[MA44]], [[MA45]], [[MA46]], [[MA47]], [[MA48]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA54]]
> ◄  [[ma53-bdk]] 📜  [[ma55-bdk]] ►
