---
sutta_code: "MA56"
sutta_title:
  - "Anumāna Sutta "
  - "Measuring Up"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA56]]
> ◄  [[ma55-bdk]] 📜  [[ma57-bdk]] ►

### 56. The Discourse to Meghiya

Thus have I heard: Once the Buddha was staying in Magadha, near the village of Jatu,^150 in a cave in a lonely wild mango grove.

At that time Venerable Meghiya was his attendant. Early one morning Venerable Meghiya put on his robe, took his bowl, and entered the village of Jatu to beg for food. Having finished begging for food, he went to the bank of the river Kimikāḷā, where he saw a level spot called the Good Mango Grove. The water of the Kimikāḷā was pleasant and agreeable, [coming] from a clear spring and being of gentle flow, not too cold and not too warm. Seeing this, Venerable Meghiya felt joy and thought: This is a level spot called the Good Mango Grove. Here the water of the Kimikāḷā is pleasant and agreeable, [coming] from a clear spring and being of gentle flow, not too cold and not too warm. If a clansman wished to practice striving,^151 he should do it in such a place. I too have something to strive for, perhaps I should practice striving [here] in this secluded place. In the afternoon Venerable Meghiya, having finished his meal and put away his robe and bowl, washed his hands and feet, and, with his sitting mat on his shoulder, approached the Buddha. He paid homage at [the Buddha’s] feet, sat to one side, and said: World-honored One, early this morning I put on my robe, took my bowl, and entered the village of Jatu to beg for food. Having finished begging for food, I went to the bank of the river Kimikāḷā, where I found a level spot called Good Mango Grove. The water of the Kimikāḷā there was pleasant and agreeable, [coming] from a clear spring and being of gentle flow, not too cold and not too warm. Seeing this, I felt joy and thought: This is a level spot called the Good Mango Grove. Here the water of the Kimikāḷā is pleasant and agreeable, [coming] from a clear spring and being of gentle flow, not too cold and not too warm. If a clansman wished to practice striving, he should do it in such a place. I too have something to strive for, perhaps I should practice striving [here] in this secluded place. World-honored One, I now wish to go to this secluded mango grove to practice striving.

Then the World-honored One said: Meghiya, don’t you know, I am all by myself here, with no attendant [apart from you]. Wait a little, until some other monk comes along to serve as my attendant, then you can go to that secluded mango grove to practice. Three times the venerable Meghiya said: “World-honored One, I now wish to go to that secluded mango grove to practice striving.” And three times the World-honored One responded:

Meghiya, don’t you know, I am all by myself here, with no attendant [apart from you]. Wait a little, until some other monk comes along to serve as my attendant, then you can go to that secluded mango grove to practice. Then Meghiya said: For the World-honored One there is nothing more to do, nothing that has to be done, nothing that has to be contemplated. For me, however, there is still more to do, there is more that has to be done, there is more to contemplate. World-honored One, I will go to that secluded mango grove to practice striving. The World-honored One said: “Meghiya, since you wish to seek striving, what else can I say? Go, Meghiya, and do as you wish.” Venerable Meghiya, having heard the Buddha’s words, accepted them well, retained them well, and repeated them well. He paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. He went to the mango grove and having entered it, spread out his sitting mat under a tree and sat cross-legged. While Venerable Meghiya was sitting in the mango grove three kinds of bad, unwholesome thoughts arose in him: thoughts of desire, thoughts of hatred, and thoughts of harming. Because of this, he recalled the World-hon- ored One. In the late afternoon he rose from sitting in meditation, went to the Buddha, paid homage at his feet, and sat to one side. He said:

World-honored One, I went to the mango grove, and while I was sitting in that secluded place three kinds of bad, unwholesome thoughts arose in me: thoughts of desire, thoughts of hatred, and thoughts of harming. Because of that, I recalled the World-honored One. The World-honored One said: Meghiya, there are five supporting conditions that are conducive to matur ing liberation of the mind that has not yet matured. What are the five? Meghiya, a monk is himself a good friend [to others] and associates with good friends, keeps the company of good friends—this, Meghiya, is the first supporting condition conducive to maturing liberation of the mind that has not yet matured. Again, Meghiya, a monk observes the training in the precepts, guards [against breaking] the code of rules, and skillfully controls his comportment [in accordance with] proper conduct, seeing great danger in even the slightest transgression and being apprehensive of it. Keeping the precepts, Meghiya, is the second supporting condition conducive to maturing liberation of the mind that has not yet matured. Again, Meghiya, a monk engages in talk about noble, meaningful matters, matters that cause the mind to become gentle, cause it to be without hindrances, namely, talk about the precepts, about samādhi, wisdom, liberation, the knowledge and vision that come with liberation, talk about self-effacement, about not enjoying socializing, about reducing desire, about contentment, abandoning,^152 dispassion, extinction, sitting in meditation, and about dependent origination. To obtain, in this way, the [kind of] talk appropriate for renunciants, fully, easily, without difficulty—this, Meghiya, is the third supporting condition conducive to maturing liberation of the mind that has not yet matured. Again, Meghiya, a monk makes relentless effort to abandon what is unwholesome and to cultivate all wholesome states. He constantly arouses the single-minded and unwavering intention to cultivate whole some roots, without giving up his task. This, Meghiya, is the fourth supporting condition conducive to maturing liberation of the mind that has not yet matured.

Again, Meghiya, a monk develops comprehension and wisdom, attains understanding concerning the rise and fall of phenomena, attains noble penetrative knowledge and discriminative understanding con- cerning the true cessation of suffering. This, Meghiya, is the fifth supporting condition conducive to matur- ing liberation of the mind that has not yet matured. Once endowed with these five supporting conditions, [a monk] should practice further in four ways. What are the four ways? He practices meditation on impurity [of the body] in order to cut off desire. He practices loving-kindness med- itation in order to cut off hatred. He practices mindfulness of breathing in order to cut off distracting thoughts. He practices perception of impermanence in order to cut off the conceit “I am.” Meghiya, if a monk is himself a good friend [to others] and asso- ciates with good friends, keeps the company of good friends, then know that he is bound to observe the training in the precepts, guard [against breaking] the code of rules, and skillfully control his com- portment [in accordance with] proper conduct, seeing great danger in even the slightest transgression and being apprehensive of it. Meghiya, if a monk is himself a good friend [to others] and asso- ciates with good friends, keeps the company of good friends, then know that he is bound to speak about noble, meaningful matters, matters that cause the mind to become gentle, cause it to be without hindrances, namely, talk about the precepts, samādhi, wisdom, liberation, about the knowledge and vision that come with liberation, talk about self-effacement, about not enjoying socializing, about reducing desire, about contentment, abandoning, dispassion, extinction, about sitting in meditation, and about dependent origination. He will be able, in this way, to obtain the [kind of] talk appropriate for renunciants, fully, easily, without difficulty. Meghiya, if a monk is himself a good friend [to others] and asso- ciates with good friends, keeps the company of good friends, then know that he is bound to make relentless effort to cut off what is unwholesome and practice all wholesome states. He will constantly

arouse single-minded and unwavering intention to cultivate wholesome roots without giving up his task. Meghiya, if a monk is himself a good friend [to others] and asso ciates with good friends, keeps the company of good friends, then know that he is bound to cultivate wisdom. He develops comprehension and wisdom, attains understanding concerning the rise and fall of phe nomena, attains noble penetrative knowledge and discriminative under standing concerning the true cessation of suffering. Meghiya, if a monk is himself a good friend [to others] and asso ciates with good friends, keeps the company of good friends, then know that he is bound to practice meditation on impurity [of the body] in order to cut off desire. He will practice loving-kindness meditation in order to cut off hatred. He will practice mindfulness of breathing in order to cut off distracting thoughts. He will practice the perception of impermanence in order to cut off the conceit “I am.” Meghiya, if a monk has gained perception of impermanence, he is bound to attain perception of no-self. Meghiya, if a monk has attained awareness of no-self, he is bound to completely abandon the conceit “I am” in this lifetime, to attain peace, cessation, extinction, the unconditioned, nirvana. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the ven erable Meghiya and the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma56-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M i 95 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[PE2]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.69]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA56]]
> ◄  [[ma55-bdk]] 📜  [[ma57-bdk]] ►
