---
sutta_code: "MA62"
sutta_title:
  - "頻鞞娑邏王迎佛 "
  - "King Bimbisāra
Meeting the Buddha"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA62]]
> ◄  [[ma61-bdk]] 📜  [[ma63-bdk]] ►

### 62. The Discourse on King Bimbisāra Meeting the Buddha

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha, who was staying in the country of Magadha with a large company of monks—a thousand monks, all free of attachment, having attained the truth, former matted-hair ascetics—was approaching Rājagaha, a city of Magadha. Then, the king of Magadha, Bimbisāra, heard that the World-honored One, who was dwelling in the country of Magadha with a large company of monks—a thousand monks, all free of attachment, having attained the truth, former matted-hair ascetics—had come to Rājagaha, a city of Magadha. Having heard that, Bimbisāra, king of Magadha, assembled his fourfold army, that is, elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry. Having assembled his fourfold army, he went to visit the Buddha accompanied by countless people, [a company that was] one league in length. Then the World-honored One, seeing from afar that Bimbisāra, king of Magadha, was coming, left the road and went to a well-established royal banyan tree, placed his sitting mat beneath it, and sat down cross-legged, together with the company of monks. Bimbisāra, king of Magadha, saw from afar the World-honored One among the trees of the forest, dignified and beautiful, like the moon amidst the stars, with radiant aura, shining like a golden mountain, endowed with handsome appearance and lofty dignity, with sense faculties calm, free of

obstruction, accomplished and disciplined, with his mind calm and quiet. Seeing this, [the king] descended from his chariot. Like any khattiya king who has been [consecrated by] the sprinkling of water on his head, who is the lord of his people and reigns over the entire land, he was equipped with the five royal insignia: first, a sword; second, a parasol; third, a royal headdress; fourth, a fly whisk with bejeweled handle; and fifth, ornate sandals. Having put aside all of these and left the fourfold army behind, he approached the Buddha on foot. Arriving there, he made obeisance and three times announced his name, “World-honored One, I am the king of Magadha, Seniya Bimbisāra.” [He said] this three times. Then, the World-honored One said, “Great king, indeed, indeed, you are Seniya Bimbisāra, king of Magadha.” Then Seniya Bimbisāra, king of Magadha, having announced his name three times, made obeisance to the Buddha and sat down to one side. Some among the citizens of Magadha made obeisance [with their heads] at the Buddha’s feet and then sat down to one side; some exchanged greetings with the Buddha and then sat down to one side; some saluted the Buddha with palms placed together [in respect] and then sat down to one side; and some, having seen the Buddha from afar, sat down silently. At that time, Venerable Uruvela Kassapa was sitting among the company [of monks]. Venerable Uruvela Kassapa was well remembered by the citizens of Magadha, being reckoned by them as a great and venerable teacher and a True Person, free of attachment. Then the citizens of Magadha thought: Does the renunciant Gotama train in the holy life under Uruvela Kassapa or does Uruvela Kassapa train in the holy life under the renunciant Gotama? At that time the World-honored One, knowing what the citizens of Maga dha were thinking, recited a verse to Venerable Uruvela Kassapa: Uruvela [Kassapa], what did you see That you stopped [worshiping] fire and came here? Tell me, Kassapa, Why do you no longer [perform] the fire sacrifice?

[Uruvela Kassapa replied:] I worshiped fire out of desire For food and drink of various flavors. [But] the vision of the middle [path] arose, like this, Therefore, I no longer delighted in [such] sacrifices. [The Buddha asked further:] Kassapa, [though] your mind did not delight In food and drink of various flavors, Tell me, Kassapa, Why did you not delight in [becoming] a dweller in the heavens? [Uruvela Kassapa replied:] [Since] seeing quiescence, cessation, And the unconditioned, I do not desire [any] existence, Least of all [that of] the revered heavens. Therefore, I no longer perform the fire sacrifice. The World-honored One is supreme, The World-honored One has no wrong thought, He has realized and awakened to all things. I have accepted [his] supreme Dharma. Then the World-honored One said, “Kassapa, you should now display [your] supernormal powers, in order to arouse faith and delight in the assembly.” Then Venerable Uruvela Kassapa performed a supernatural feat such that he disappeared from his seat and appeared in the east, soaring through the air while displaying the four postures, of which the first is walking, the second standing, the third sitting, and the fourth is reclining. Again, he entered samādhi on the fire [element]. Once Venerable Uruvela Kassapa had entered samādhi on the fire [element], there emerged from his body flames of various colors: blue, yellow, red, and white, and amid them clear water. When fire emerged from the lower part of his body, water emerged from the upper part of his body; when fire emerged from the upper part of his body, water emerged from the lower part of his body.

In the same way [he appeared] in the south,... in the west,... in the north, soaring through the air while displaying the four postures, of which the first is walking, the second standing, the third sitting, and the fourth is reclining. Again, he entered samādhi on the fire [element]. Once Venerable Uruvela Kassapa had entered samādhi on the fire [element], there emerged from his body flames of various colors: blue, yellow, red, and white, and amid them clear water. When fire emerged from the lower part of his body, water emerged from the upper part of his body; when fire emerged from the upper part of his body, water emerged from the lower part of his body. Then Venerable Uruvela Kassapa, having completed his supernatural feat, made obeisance to the Buddha and said: World-honored One, the Buddha is my master; I am the disciple of the Buddha. The Buddha has all-encompassing knowledge; I do not have all-encompassing knowledge. Then the World-honored One said, “So it is, Kassapa; so it is, Kassapa. I have all-encompassing knowledge; you do not have all-encompassing knowledge.” At that time, Venerable Uruvela Kassapa recited a verse about himself: In the past when I was ignorant, I sacrificed to fire in order to be liberated. Though old, I was like one born blind. I had wrong [view] and did not see the ultimate truth. Now I see the superior path Taught by the supreme nāga: The unconditioned, final liberation from suffering. When that is seen, birth and death are ended. Having witnessed this, the citizens of Magadha thought: The renunciant Gotama does not train in the holy life under Uruvela Kassapa; Uruvela Kassapa trains in the holy life under the renunciant Gotama.

The World-honored One, knowing the thoughts of the citizens of Maga- dha, then taught the Dharma to Seniya Bimbisāra, king of Magadha, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting him. Having with countless skillful means taught him the Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him, [he did] as all buddhas do when first teaching the true Dharma to delight their hearers: he taught him about generosity, virtue, rebirth in heaven, the disadvantages of sensual desire, and the defilement of [continued] birth and death, extolling the excellence of dis- passion and the purity of the constituents of the path. The World-honored One gave the great king [such] teachings. The Buddha knew that [the king’s] mind was delighted, prepared, mal- leable, able to endure, uplifted, one-pointed, free of doubt, free of the hin- drances, [possessing] the ability and power to receive the true Dharma, in accordance with the essential teaching of all buddhas. The World-honored One then taught him about suffering, its arising, its cessation and the path [leading to its cessation]:

Great king, material form arises and ceases. You should know the arising and ceasing of material form. Great king, feeling... perception... voli tional formations... consciousness arises and ceases. You should know the arising and ceasing of consciousness. Great king, just as, when it rains heavily, bubbles arise and cease on the water surface, so, great king, is the arising and ceasing of material form. You should know the arising and ceasing of material form. Great king, feeling... perception

... volitional formations... consciousness arises and ceases. You should know the arising and ceasing of consciousness. Great king, if a clansman knows the arising and ceasing of material form, then he knows that there will not be a re-arising of [the same] material form in the future. Great king, if a clansman knows the arising and ceasing of feeling ... perception... volitional formations... consciousness, then he knows that there will not be a re-arising of [the same] consciousness in the future. Great king, if a clansman [in this way] knows material form as it really is, then he does not become attached to material form, does not

speculate about material form, does not become defiled [by] material form, does not dwell on material form, and does not delight in material form as “I am this.” Great king, if a clansman [in this way] knows feeling... percep tion... volitional formations... consciousness as it really is, then he does not become attached to consciousness, does not speculate about consciousness, does not become defiled [by] consciousness, does not dwell on consciousness, and does not delight in consciousness as “I am this.” Great king, if a clansman does not become attached to material form, does not speculate about material form, does not become defiled [by] material form, does not dwell on material form, and does not delight in material form as “I am this,” then he will no longer cling to material form in the future. Great king, if a clansman does not become attached to feeling... to perception... to volitional formations... to consciousness, does not speculate about consciousness, does not become defiled [by] con sciousness, does not dwell on consciousness, and does not delight in consciousness as “I am this,” then he will no longer cling to conscious ness in the future. Great king, such a clansman has become immeasurable, ines timable, unlimited. He has attained stillness. If he has become detached from these five aggregates, he will not again cling to any aggregate. Then the citizens of Magadha thought: If material form is impermanent, if feeling... perception... volitional formations... consciousness is impermanent, then who lives and who experiences suffering and happiness? The World-honored One, knowing the thoughts of the citizens of Maga dha, told the monks: An ignorant worldling, one who is not learned, regards himself as “I am a self” and is attached to that self. However, there is no self; there is nothing that belongs to a self; [all this] is empty of a self and empty of anything that belongs to a self. When phenomena arise, they arise;

when phenomena cease, they cease. All this is [just] a combination of causes and conditions, giving rise to suffering. If the causes and con- ditions were not present, then all suffering would cease. It is because of the combination of causes and conditions that living beings continue and all phenomena arise. The Tathāgata, having seen all living beings continuously arising, declares: There is birth and there is death. With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses human [vision], I see beings as they die and are reborn handsome or ugly, excellent or not excellent, as they come and go between good or bad realms of existence, in accordance with their [previous] deeds. I see this as it really is. If these living beings were ill behaved in body, speech, and mind, if they reviled noble ones, held wrong views, and undertook actions [based on] wrong views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking up of the body, after death, they will certainly go to a bad realm of existence, [even] being born in hell. If [however] these living beings were well behaved in body, speech, and mind, if they did not revile noble ones, held right views, and undertook actions [based on] right views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking up of the body, after death, they will certainly go to a good realm of existence, [even] to a heavenly realm. Knowing that it is thus for them, I do not say to them, “It is the self that can feel, can talk, that gives teachings, that undertakes devel- opment, that teaches development, that experiences the fruits of good or evil actions here and there.” Herein, some may think, “This does not match; this cannot stand.” [But despite their objections] these processes take place in accor- dance with Dharma: Because of this, that arises; if this cause is not present, that does not arise. Because this exists, that exists; if this ceases, that ceases. That is to say: with ignorance as condition there are voli- tional formations; (and so on up to) with birth as condition there are old age and death. If ignorance ceases, volitional formations cease; (and so on up to) if birth ceases, old age and death cease. [The Buddha said] “Great king, what do you think? Is material form permanent or impermanent?”

[The king] answered, “It is impermanent, World-honored One.” [The Buddha] asked again, “If it is impermanent, is it suffering or not suffering?” [The king] answered, “It is suffering [since] it changes, World-honored One.” [The Buddha] asked again, “If it is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, does a learned noble disciple take it as: ‘This I am, this is mine, I belong to that’?” [The king] answered, “No, World-honored One.” [The Buddha asked again]: “Great king, what do you think? Is feeling... is perception... are volitional formations... is consciousness permanent or impermanent?” [The king] answered, “It is impermanent, World-honored One.” [The Buddha] asked again, “If it is impermanent, is it suffering or not suffering?” [The king] answered, “It is suffering [since] it changes, World-honored One.” [The Buddha] asked again, “If it is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, does a learned noble disciple take it as: ‘This I am, this is mine, I belong to that’?” [The king] answered, “No, World-honored One.” [The Buddha said:] Therefore, great king, you should train in this way: Whatever material form there is, whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, good or bad, far or near, all that I am not, all that is not mine, and I do not belong to that. You should wisely contemplate it and know it as it really is. Great king, “Whatever feeling... perception... volitional for- mations... consciousness there is, whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, good or bad, far or near, all that I am not, all that is not mine, and I do not belong to that.” You should wisely contemplate it and know it as it really is. Great king, if a learned noble disciple contemplates in this way, then he becomes disenchanted with material form, disenchanted with

feeling... with perception... with volitional formations... with con- sciousness. Having become disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Having become dispassionate, he attains liberation. Having attained liberation, he knows that he is liberated. He knows as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what was to be done has been done. There will not be another existence.” As the Buddha delivered this teaching, [the mind of] Seniya Bimbisāra, king of Magadha, became free of defilements, and [in regard] to all phenomena the Dharma eye arose [in him]; and [the minds of] eighty thousand gods and twelve thousand citizens of Magadha became free of defilements, and [in regard] to all phenomena the Dharma eye arose [in them]. Then Seniya Bimbisāra, king of Magadha, saw the Dharma, attained the Dharma, realized the perfectly pure Dharma; he discarded doubt, overcame perplexity; he would take no other teacher, would never again follow another; he was without uncertainty. Having attained the fruit of realization and attained unshakeability in the Dharma of the World-honored One, [the king] rose from his seat, made obeisance [with his head] at the Buddha’s feet, and said:

World-honored One, I now take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of monks. May the World-honored One please receive me as a lay follower; from this day on until life ends, I take refuge [in the Triple Gem] for my whole life. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Seniya Bimbisāra, king of Magadha, eighty thousand gods, twelve thousand citizens of Magadha, and a thousand monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma62-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MAHAVASTU]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA62]]
> ◄  [[ma61-bdk]] 📜  [[ma63-bdk]] ►
