---
sutta_code: "MA63"
sutta_title:
  - "鞞娑陵耆 "
  - "At Vebhaḷiṅga"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA63]]
> ◄  [[ma62-bdk]] 📜  [[ma64-bdk]] ►

### 63. The Discourse at Vebhaḷiṅga

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying in the country of Kosala. At that time the World-honored One was walking on a road together with a large company of monks. On the way he smiled joyfully. Venerable Ānanda, on seeing the World-honored One smile, placed his palms together [in respect] toward the Buddha and said:

World-honored One, what is the reason for this smile? Buddhas and Tathāgatas, free from attachment and fully awakened, do not smile randomly, for no reason. May I hear the meaning [of this smile]? Then the World-honored One said: “Ānanda, in this place the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, sat and taught [his] dis ciples the Dharma.” Then Venerable Ānanda prepared a seat in that place and, with palms placed together [in respect] toward the Buddha, said: World-honored One, may the World-honored One also sit in this place and teach his disciples the Dharma! In this way, this place will have been made use of by two Tathāgatas, free from attachment and fully awakened. Then the World-honored One sat on the seat prepared in that place by Venerable Ānanda. Having sat down, he said: Ānanda, in this place there was an assembly hall of the Tathāgata Kas sapa, free from attachment and fully awakened. Seated in it, the Tathā gata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, taught his dis ciples the Dharma. Ānanda, in former times in this place there was a town called Vebha ḷiṅga, very prosperous and pleasant, with many inhabitants. Ānanda, in the town of Vebhaḷiṅga there was a great brahmin householder named Non-anger,^161 who was very wealthy and prosper ous, with immeasurable wealth, and possessing in abundance all kinds of livestock, property, feudatories, and manors. Ānanda, the great brahmin householder Non-anger had a son named Uttara, a young brahmin. He was born to parents of pure descent. For seven generations on both his father’s and mother’s sides there was uninterrupted continuity of births without blemish. He had learned much and retained it, and was able to recite it. He was master of the four Vedas with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as the fifth. Ānanda, young Uttara had a good friend named Nandipāla, who

was a potter. Young Uttara always cherished him. They delighted in seeing [each other], never tiring of it. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter had taken refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of monks. He was free of doubt in the Triple Gem, and he had no perplexity in regard to suffering, its arising, its cessation, and the path [leading to its cessation]. He had attained confidence, was keeping the precepts, had learned much, was generous, and was accomplished in wisdom. [Nandipāla] abstained from killing, had given up killing, had dis- carded blade and cudgel. He had shame and scruple, and a mind [full of] loving-kindness and compassion, [wishing to] benefit all [beings], including insects. He had purified his mind with regard to killing living beings. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from taking what is not given, had given up taking what is not given. He took [only] what was given and delighted in taking [only] what was given. He was always fond of generosity, rejoicing in it, without stinginess, and not expecting a reward. He had purified his mind with regard to taking what is not given. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from sexual activity, had given up sexual activity. He diligently practiced celibacy, was energetic in this good conduct, pure, without blemish, abstaining from sensual desires, having given up sexual desires. He had purified his mind with regard to sexual activity. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from false speech, had given up false speech. He spoke the truth, delighted in the truth, was unshakably established in the truth, was completely trustworthy, and would not deceive [anyone in] the world. He had purified his mind with regard to false speech. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from divisive speech, had given up divisive speech. He did not engage in divisive speech, did not intend to harm others. Hearing something from this person he did not tell it to that person, in order to harm this person; hearing something from that person he did not tell it to this person, in order to harm that

person. He had the wish to unite those that are divided, delighting in unity. He did not belong to any faction and did not delight in or praise factions. He had purified his mind with regard to divisive speech. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from harsh speech, had given up harsh speech. He had given up the type of speech that consists of words that are rough and rude in tone, offensive words that grate on the ear, that people neither enjoy nor desire, that cause others suffering and vexation, and that are not conducive to samādhi. He spoke the type of speech that consists of words that are pure, peaceful, gentle, and beneficial, that are pleasant to the ear and enter the mind, that are enjoyable and desirable, that give others happiness, words endowed with meaning, that do not make others afraid, and that conduce to others attaining samādhi. He had purified his mind with regard to harsh speech. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from frivolous speech, had given up frivolous speech. He spoke at the [proper] time, speaking what is true, what is Dharma, what is meaningful, what is calming, delighting in speaking what is calming. [In regard to any] matter he would teach well and admonish well, in accordance with the [proper] time and in a proper way. He had purified his mind with regard to friv olous speech. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from earning profits, had given up earning profits. He had discarded weights and measures, dis carded accepting goods, did not bind people, did not try to cheat with measures, nor did he deceive others for the sake of some small profit. He had purified his mind with regard to earning profits. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from accepting widows or girls, had given up accepting widows or girls. He had purified his mind with regard to accepting widows or girls. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from accepting male or female servants, had given up accepting male or female servants. He had purified his mind with regard to accepting male or female servants. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from accepting elephants, horses, cattle, or sheep, had given up accepting elephants, horses, cattle,

or sheep. He had purified his mind with regard to accepting elephants, horses, cattle, or sheep. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from accepting chickens or swine, had given up accepting chickens or swine. He had purified his mind with regard to accepting chickens or swine. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from accepting farmlands or shops, had given up accepting farmlands or shops. He had purified his mind with regard to accepting farmlands or shops. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes, had given up accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes. He had purified his mind with regard to accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from alcoholic beverages, had given up alcoholic beverages. He had purified his mind with regard to alcoholic beverages. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from [using] high or wide beds, had given up [using] high or wide beds. He had purified his mind with regard to high or wide beds. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from [using] flower gar- lands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics, had given up [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics. He had purified his mind with regard to flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from singing, dancing, and acting, and from going to see or hear them; he had given up singing, dancing, and acting and going to see or hear them. He had purified his mind with regard to singing, dancing, and acting, and going to see or hear them. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from accepting gold and silver, had given up accepting gold and silver. He had purified his mind with regard to accepting gold and silver. Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter abstained from eating after noon, had given up eating after noon. He always took [only] a single meal [each day], not eating at night, training in eating [only] at the [proper] time. He had purified his mind with regard to eating after noon.

Ānanda, for his whole life Nandipāla the potter abstained from taking a spade or a shovel into his hand. He did not dig the earth himself nor tell others to do so. If water had washed out a bank so that it col lapsed, or if a rat had broken up some earth, he would take that [earth] and use it to make his pots. These he would put on one side and tell customers: “If you have peas, rice, wheat, big or small hemp seed, bi beans, or mustard seed, pour them out [as payment] and take whichever pot you wish.” Ānanda, for his whole life Nandipāla the potter had been looking after his father and mother, who were blind. They were entirely depend ent on others, so he looked after them. Ānanda, when the night was over, at dawn, Nandipāla the potter approached the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened. Arrived there, he paid his respects and sat down to one side. The Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, taught him the Dharma, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting him. Having, with countless skillful means, taught him the Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him, [the Tathāgata Kassapa] remained silent. Then, Ānanda, Nandipāla the potter, having been taught the Dharma by the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, having been exhorted, encouraged, and delighted, rose from his seat, made obeisance at the feet of the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attach ment and fully awakened, circumambulated him three times and left. At that time, when the night was over, at dawn, the young brahmin Uttara mounted a chariot [drawn by] white horses and left the town of Vebhaḷiṅga accompanied by five hundred young brahmins. He was approaching a secluded place with the intention of teaching his disciples, who had come from several different countries, [intending] to instruct [them in] recitation of the brahminical scriptures. Then the young brahmin Uttara saw from afar that Nandipāla the potter was coming. Seeing him, he asked, “Nandipāla, where are you coming from?” Nandipāla replied, “I am coming from paying my respects to the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened. Uttara,

come with me and approach the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attach- ment and fully awakened, and pay your respects!” Then the young brahmin Uttara replied, “Nandipāla, I do not want to see the bald-headed renunciant. The bald-headed renunciant does not know how to attain the path, since the path is difficult to attain.” Then Nandipāla the potter took hold of the topknot of the young brahmin Uttara and forced him to descend from the chariot. Then the young brahmin Uttara thought: “This potter Nandipāla never makes jokes and he is neither mad nor stupid; there must certainly be a reason why he now takes hold of my topknot.” Having thought this, he said, “Nandipāla, I will go with you, I will go with you.” Nandipāla was delighted and said, “To go [with me and see the Tathāgata Kassapa] is very good.” Then Nandipāla the potter and Uttara the young brahmin approached the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, and on arriving there, paid their respects and sat down to one side. Nandipāla the potter said to the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened:

World-honored One, this is my friend, the young brahmin Uttara, who always looks on me with affection and untiringly delights in seeing me. He has no faith or respect for the World-honored One. May the World-honored One teach him the Dharma well, so that he becomes delighted and comes to have faith and respect.

Then the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, taught the Dharma to Nandipāla the potter and the young brahmin Uttara, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting them. Having, with countless skillful means, taught them the Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted them, [the Tathāgata Kassapa] remained silent. Then, [after] the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, had taught them the Dharma, exhorted, encouraged, and delighted them, the potter Nandipāla and the young brahmin Uttara rose from their seats, made obeisance at the feet of the Tathāgata Kassapa,

free from attachment and fully awakened, circumambulated him three times, and departed. Then, when they had not yet gone far on the return journey, the young brahmin Uttara asked: Nandipāla, having heard this sublime Dharma from the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, why do you remain at home, [why are you] unable to abandon [household life] and train in the noble path? Then Nandipāla the potter replied: Uttara, you yourself know that for my whole life I have been look ing after my father and mother, who are blind and entirely depend ent on others. It is because I am supporting and looking after my father and mother [that I cannot leave the household life]. Then the young brahmin Uttara asked: Nandipāla, can I leave the household life to practice the path, fol lowing the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened? Can I receive the full ordination, become a monk, and practice the holy life? Then the potter Nandipāla and the young brahmin Uttara promptly left that place and again approached the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened. Having arrived there and paid their respects, they sat down to one side. Nandipāla the potter said to the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened: World-honored One, when we had not yet gone far on our return journey, this young brahmin Uttara asked me, “Nandipāla, having heard this sublime Dharma from the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, why do you remain at home? [Why are you] unable to abandon [household life] and train in the noble path?”

World-honored One, I replied, “Uttara, you yourself know that for my whole life I have been looking after my father and mother, who are blind and entirely dependent on others. It is because I am supporting and looking after my father and mother [that I cannot leave the household life].”

[Then] Uttara asked me further:

Nandipāla, can I leave the household life to train in the path fol lowing the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened? Can I receive the full ordination, become a monk, and practice the holy life? May the World-honored One let him leave the household life to train in the path by giving him the full ordination [so that he can] become a monk and practice the holy life!

The Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, assented to Nandipāla’s [request] by remaining silent. Then Nandipāla the potter, understanding that the Tathāgata Kas- sapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, had assented by remain- ing silent, rose from his seat, paid homage with his head, circumam- bulated him three times and departed. Then, soon after Nandipāla had left, the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, let young Uttara leave the house- hold life to train in the path by giving him the full ordination. Having [let him] leave the household life to train in the path, and having given him the full ordination, [the Tathāgata Kassapa] stayed for several days, as he wished, in the town of Vebhaḷiṅga. [Then] he took his robes and bowl and, with a large company of monks, went wandering with the intention of going to Benares, a town in the Kāsi country. Trav- eling unhurriedly, they reached Benares, a town in the Kāsi country. At Benares they stayed in the Deer Park, the Place of Seers. Then King Kiki [of Benares] heard that the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, who was wandering in the Kāsi country with a large company of monks, had reached Benares and was staying in the Deer Park, the Place of Seers.

Hearing this, King Kiki told his charioteer, “Prepare the vehicles. I now want to approach the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened.” Then the charioteer, having received the king’s order, immediately prepared the vehicles. Having prepared the vehicles, [he] returned and told the king, “The fine chariots have been prepared. They are at your majesty’s disposal.” Then King Kiki, having mounted a fine chariot, departed from Benares and headed for the Deer Park, the Place of Seers. Then King Kiki saw from afar the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, among the trees of the forest, dignified and beautiful, like the moon amidst the stars, with radiant aura, shining like a golden mountain, endowed with handsome appearance and lofty dignity, with sense faculties calm, free of obstruction, accomplished and disciplined, with his mind calm and quiet. Seeing this, [the king] descended from his chariot and on foot approached the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awak ened. On arriving there, [the king] made obeisance and sat down to one side. After King Kiki had sat down to one side, the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, taught him the Dharma, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting him. Having with countless skillful means taught him the Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him, [the Tathāgata Kassapa] remained silent. Then, after the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, had taught him the Dharma, exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him, King Kiki rose from his seat, arranged his clothes so as to bare one shoulder, placed his palms together [in respect] toward the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, and said: “May the World-honored One together with the company of monks accept my invitation [for a meal] tomorrow.” The Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, accepted King Kiki’s invitation by remaining silent. Then King Kiki, understanding that the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, had accepted his invitation by remaining silent, paid homage with his head, circumambulated him

three times, and departed. Having returned home, during the night all kinds of very beautiful, fresh, and excellent dishes were prepared in abundance for eating, savoring, and digesting. When the night’s prepa- rations were finished, towards dawn, seats were arranged [and a message was sent:] “World-honored One, the time has now come; the food is ready. May the World-honored One come according to his time!” Then when the night was over, at dawn, the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, put on his robes and took his bowl. Together with the company of monks, the World-honored one went to the home of King Kiki and sat on a prepared seat before the company of monks. Then King Kiki, seeing that the Buddha and the company of monks were seated, personally offered water for washing. With his own hands he served all kinds of very beautiful, fresh, and excellent dishes, making sure there was enough to eat, savor, and digest. After the meal was finished, the utensils had been cleared away, and water for washing had been offered, [King Kiki] prepared a low seat and sat down to one side to listen to the Dharma. Once King Kiki was seated, the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, taught him the Dharma, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting him. Having with countless skillful means taught him the Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him, [the Tathāgata Kassapa] remained silent. Then, after the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, had taught him the Dharma, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting him, King Kiki rose from his seat, arranged his clothes so as to bare one shoulder, placed his palms together [in respect] towards the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, and said:

May the World-honored One, together with the company of monks, accept my invitation to spend the rains retreat here in Benares! I will prepare five hundred rooms and five hundred beds and mattresses for the World-honored One; and I will provide, for the World-honored One and the company of monks, white rice like this and food of various flavors similar to what a king eats.

The Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, said to King Kiki, “Great king, please stop, please stop! Though my heart is pleased and satisfied [by your kind offer].” A second and a third time King Kiki placed his palms together [in respect] toward the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, and said: May the World-honored One, together with the company of monks, accept my invitation to spend the rains retreat here in Benares! I will prepare five hundred rooms and five hundred beds and mattresses for the World-honored One; and I will provide, for the World-honored One and the company of monks, white rice like this and food of various flavors similar to what a king eats. And a second and a third time the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attach ment and fully awakened, said to King Kiki, “Great king, please stop, please stop! Though my heart is pleased and satisfied [by your kind offer].” Then King Kiki could not bear it and did not like it. His heart was full of grief and distress, [thinking:] The Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, together with the company of monks, does not accept my invitation to spend the rains retreat here in Benares. Having had this thought, King Kiki told the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, “World-honored One, is there any other lay follower who [is able to] make offerings to the World honored One as I do?” The Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, told King Kiki: Yes, there is. In your realm there is a town called Vebhaḷiṅga, very prosperous and pleasant, with many inhabitants. Great king, in that town of Vebhaḷiṅga, there is a potter, Nandipāla. Great king, Nandipāla the potter has taken refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the community of monks. He is free of

doubt in the Triple Gem, and he has no perplexity in regard to suf- fering, its arising, its cessation, and the path [leading to its cessa- tion]. He has attained confidence, is keeping the precepts, has learned much, is generous, and is accomplished in wisdom. [Nandipāla] abstains from killing, has given up killing, having discarded blade and cudgel. He has shame and scruple, and a mind [full of] loving-kindness and compassion, [wishing to] benefit all [beings], including insects. He has purified his mind with regard to killing living beings. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from taking what is not given, has given up taking what is not given. He takes [only] what is given and delights in taking [only] what is given. He is always fond of generosity, rejoicing in it, without stinginess, and not expecting a reward. He has purified his mind with regard to taking what is not given. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from sexual activity, has given up sexual activity. He diligently practices celibacy, is energetic in this good conduct, pure, without blemish, abstaining from sensual desires, having given up sexual desires. He has puri- fied his mind with regard to sexual activity. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from false speech, has given up false speech. He speaks the truth, delights in the truth, is unshakably established in the truth, is completely trustworthy, and would not deceive [anyone in] the world. He has purified his mind with regard to false speech. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from divisive speech, has given up divisive speech. He does not engage in divisive speech, does not intend to harm others. Hearing something from this person he does not tell it to that person, in order to harm this person; hearing something from that person he does not tell it to this person, in order to harm that person. He has the wish to unite those that are divided, delighting in unity. He does not belong to any faction and does not delight in or praise factions. He has puri- fied his mind with regard to divisive speech.

Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from harsh speech, has given up harsh speech. He has given up the type of speech that consists of words that are rough and rude in tone, offensive words that grate on the ear, that people neither enjoy nor desire, that cause others suffering and vexation, and that are not conducive to samādhi. He speaks the type of speech that consists of words that are pure, peaceful, gentle, and beneficial, that are pleasant to the ear and enter the mind, that are enjoyable and desirable, that give others happiness, words endowed with meaning, that do not make others afraid and that help others to attain samādhi. He has purified his mind with regard to harsh speech. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from frivolous speech, has given up frivolous speech. He speaks at the [proper] time, speaking what is true, what is Dharma, what is meaningful, what is calming, delighting in speaking what is calming. [In regard to any] matter he teaches well and admonishes well, in accordance with the [proper] time and in a proper way. He has purified his mind with regard to frivolous speech. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from earning profits, has given up earning profits. He has discarded weights and meas ures, discarded accepting goods, he does not bind people, he does not try to cheat with measures, nor does he deceive others for the sake of some small profit. He has purified his mind with regard to earning profits. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from accepting wid ows or girls, has given up accepting widows or girls. He has puri fied his mind with regard to accepting widows or girls. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from accepting male or female servants, has given up accepting male or female servants. He has purified his mind with regard to accepting male or female servants. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from accepting ele phants, horses, cattle, or sheep, has given up accepting elephants,

horses, cattle or sheep. He has purified his mind with regard to accepting elephants, horses, cattle, or sheep. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from accepting chickens or swine, has given up accepting chickens or swine. He has purified his mind with regard to accepting chickens or swine. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from accepting farm- lands or shops, has given up accepting farmlands or shops. He has purified his mind with regard to accepting farmlands or shops. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes, has given up accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes. He has purified his mind with regard to accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from alcoholic bev- erages, has given up alcoholic beverages. He has purified his mind with regard to alcoholic beverages. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from [using] high or wide beds, has given up [using] high or wide beds. He has puri- fied his mind with regard to high or wide beds. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics, has given up [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics. He has puri- fied his mind with regard to flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from singing, danc- ing, and acting, and from going to see or hear them; he has given up singing, dancing, and acting, and going to see or hear them. He has purified his mind with regard to singing, dancing, and act- ing, and going to see or hear them. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from accepting gold and silver, has given up accepting gold and silver. He has purified his mind with regard to accepting gold and silver. Great king, Nandipāla the potter abstains from eating after noon, has given up eating after noon. He always takes [only] a single meal [each day], not eating at night, training in eating at

the [proper] time. He has purified his mind with regard to eating after noon. Great king, for his whole life Nandipāla the potter abstains from taking a spade or a shovel into his hand; he does not dig the earth himself nor tell others to do so. If water has washed out a bank so that it has collapsed, or if a rat has broken up some earth, he takes that [earth] and uses it to make his pots. These he puts on one side and tells customers, “If you have peas, rice, wheat, big or small hempseed, bi beans, or mustard seed, pour them out [as payment] and take whichever pot you wish.” Great king, for his whole life Nandipāla the potter has been looking after his father and mother, who are blind. They are entirely dependent on others, so he is looking after them. Great king, I recall that in the past I was staying at the town of Vebhaḷiṅga. Great king, at that time, at dawn, having put on my robes and taken my almsbowl, I entered the town of Vebha ḷiṅga to beg for food. Having done the almsround in [proper] sequence [from house to house], I arrived at the home of Nandipāla the potter. At that time Nandipāla was not at home, having left on account of some small matter. Great king, I asked the parents of Nandipāla the potter, “Elders, where is the potter now?” They answered me, “World-honored One, [our] supporter is temporarily not at home, having left on account of some small matter. Well-gone One, [our] supporter is temporarily not at home, having left on account of some small matter. World-honored One, there is boiled wheat and rice in the bamboo basket and there is bean soup in the pot. May the World-honored One himself take what he wishes, out of compassion!” Then, great king, in accordance with the law of Uttarakuru, I took rice and soup from the bamboo basket and the pot and departed. Later, when Nandipāla the potter returned home and discov ered that the rice and soup in the bamboo basket and the pot had diminished, he asked his parents, “Who has taken the soup and rice?”

His parents answered, “Good son, the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, came here today on his alm- sround. He took rice and soup from the bamboo basket and the pot and departed.” Hearing this, Nandipāla the potter thought: “It is an excellent benefit, a great merit for us, that the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, felt free [to take what] he wished at our home.” Delighted, he sat down cross-legged with calm and quiet mind, and remained thus for seven days. His delight and happiness continued for [altogether] fifteen days; and his parents also experienced delight and happiness for seven days. Again, great king, I recall that in the past I was staying at the town of Vebhaḷiṅga. Great king, at that time, at dawn, having put on my robes and taken my almsbowl, I entered the town of Veb- haḷiṅga to beg for food. Having done the almsround in due order, I arrived at the home of Nandipāla the potter. At that time, Nandipāla was not at home, having left on account of some small matter. Great king, I asked the parents of Nandipāla the potter, “Elders, where is the potter now?” They answered me, “World-honored One, [our] supporter is temporarily not at home, having left on account of some small matter. Well-gone One, [our] supporter is temporarily not at home, having left on account of some small matter. World-honored One, there is rice in the big pot and there is soup in the small pot. May the World-honored One himself take what he wishes, out of [com- passion]!” Great king, in accordance with the law of Uttarakuru, I took rice and soup from the big pot and the small pot and departed. Later when Nandipāla the potter returned home and discovered that the rice in the big pot and the soup in the small pot had dimin- ished, he asked his parents, “Who has taken rice from the big pot and soup from the small pot?” His parents answered, “Good son, the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, came here today on his alms-round, and he took rice and soup from the big pot and the small pot and departed.”

Hearing this, Nandipāla the potter thought: “It is an excellent benefit, a great merit for us, that the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, felt free [to take what] he wished at our home.” Delighted, he sat down cross-legged with calm and quiet mind, and remained so for seven days. His delight continued for [altogether] fifteen days; and his parents also experienced joy and happiness for seven days. Again, great king, I recall that in the past I was spending the rains retreat in dependence on the town of Vebhaḷiṅga. Great king, at that time my newly built hut had not yet been roofed in. The old potter hut of Nandipāla the potter had been newly roofed in. Great king, I told my attendant monks, “Go and demolish the [roof of] the old potter hut of Nandipāla the potter and bring it to roof my hut!” Then the attendant monks, following my instruction, went to the home of Nandipāla the potter, demolished [the roof of] the old potter hut, bound it together, and brought it to roof my hut. The parents of Nandipāla the potter heard the [sound of the roof] of the old potter hut being demolished. Hearing it, they asked, “Who is demolishing [the roof of] the old potter hut of Nandipāla the potter?” The attendant monks answered, “Elders, we are the attendant monks of the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened. We are demolishing [the roof of] the old potter hut of Nandipāla the potter, binding it together, and taking it in order to roof the hut of the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened.” The parents of Nandipāla the potter said, “Venerable ones, take away whatever you wish, without limitation!” Later, when Nandipāla the potter returned home and discov ered that the [roof of] the old potter hut had been demolished, he asked his parents, “Who has demolished [the roof] of my old potter hut?” His parents answered, “Good son, today the attendant monks of the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened,

demolished [the roof of] the old potter hut, bound it together, and took it away to roof the hut of the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened.” Hearing this, Nandipāla the potter thought: “It is an excellent benefit, a great merit for us, that the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, felt free [to take what] he wished at our home.” Delighted, he sat down cross-legged with calm and quiet mind, and remained so for seven days. His joy and happiness continued for [altogether] fifteen days; and his parents also expe- rienced joy and happiness for seven days. Great king, the old potter hut of Nandipāla the potter was not affected by rain for the entire four months of that rainy season. Why was that? Because it was covered by the mighty power of a Buddha. Great king, Nandipāla the potter was able to bear it, did not dislike it, and had no grief or distress in his heart [on thinking]: “The Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, felt free [to do as] he wished at our home.” You, great king, could not bear it and did dislike it, and you had great grief and distress in your heart [on thinking]: “The Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, together with the company of monks, does not accept my invitation to spend the rains retreat here in Benares.” Then the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attachment and fully awakened, taught the Dharma to King Kiki, exhorting, encouraging, and delighting him. Having, with countless skillful means, taught him the Dharma, having exhorted, encouraged, and delighted him, [the Tathāgata Kassapa] rose from his seat and departed. Then, not long after the Tathāgata Kassapa, free from attach- ment and fully awakened, had left, King Kiki told his attendants, “Fill five hundred chariots with white rice and food of various fla- vors, similar to what a king eats, take them to the home of Nandipāla the potter, and tell him, ‘Nandipāla, King Kiki sends these five hundred chariots of white rice and food of various flavors, similar to what a king eats, to be offered to you. You should accept them now out of compassion!’”

Then the attendants, having received these instructions of the king, filled five hundred chariots with white rice and food of various flavors, similar to what a king eats, took them to the home of Nandipāla the potter, and told him, “Nandipāla, King Kiki sends these five hundred chariots of white rice and food of various flavors, similar to what a king eats, to be offered to you. You should accept them now out of compassion!” Then Nandipāla the potter politely declined and did not accept [the offering], telling the attendants, “Noble friends, in King Kiki’s household and country there are many great affairs which require vast expense. Knowing this, I do not accept [his offering].” The Buddha said to Ānanda: What do you think? Do you think that the young brahmin Uttara was someone other [than me]? Do not think so. You should know that he was me. At that time, Ānanda, I wanted to benefit myself, to benefit others, to benefit many people; I had compassion for the whole world, and I sought prosperity, benefit, peace, and happiness for gods and human beings. In the teaching taught at that time I did not reach the ultimate, the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate completion of the holy life. At that time I was not able to abandon birth, old age, disease, death, sorrow, and distress, and I was not able to attain liberation from all suffering. Ānanda, I have now appeared in this world as a Tathāgata, free of attachment, fully awakened, perfect in knowledge and conduct, a Well gone One, a knower of the world, unsurpassable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and human beings, a Buddha, a Fortunate One. I now benefit myself, benefit others, benefit many people; I have compassion for the whole world, and I seek prosperity, benefit, peace, and happiness for gods and human beings. The teaching I now give leads to the ultimate, is the ultimate purity, the ultimate completion of the holy life. I have now abandoned birth,

old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and distress. I have now attained com- plete liberation from suffering. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the venerable Ānanda and the [other] monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma63-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA63]]
> ◄  [[ma62-bdk]] 📜  [[ma64-bdk]] ►
