---
sutta_code: "MA65"
sutta_title:
  - "烏鳥喻 "
  - "Raven Parable"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA65]]
> ◄  [[ma64-bdk]] 📜  [[ma66-bdk]] ►

### 65. The Discourse with the Raven Parable

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time, the World-honored One addressed the monks: In the past, when a wheel-turning monarch wanted to test his jewel treasure, he assembled his fourfold army, that is, elephant troops, cav alry, chariot troops, and infantry. The fourfold army having been assem bled, in the dark of night, at midnight, a tall banner was raised, the jewel was placed on top of it, and it was taken out to the pleasure park. The brilliance of the jewel illuminated the fourfold army, and its light extended over an area measuring half a league in [any] direction. At that time, there was a brahmin who had this thought: “I would like to go and see the wheel-turning monarch, together with his fourfold army, and look at the beryl jewel.” Then that brahmin thought again, “For the time being, never mind about visiting the wheel-turning monarch with his fourfold army, and looking at the beryl jewel. I would rather go into the forest.” So, the brahmin approached the forest. Having arrived there, he entered and went to the foot of a tree. Not long after he had sat down, an otter came by. Seeing it, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, otter, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The otter] answered, “Brahmin, in earlier times this pond was fed to the brim by a clear spring, had many lotus roots and flowers, and was full of fish and turtles. I formerly [lived] in dependence on it, but now it has dried up. Brahmin, you should know that I want to leave it, to live in a large river. I want to leave now, I am afraid of people.”

Then, having had this exchange with the brahmin, the otter left. The brahmin [remained] sitting there as before. Again, there came a _jiu-mu_ bird.^164 Seeing it, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, _jiu-mu_ bird, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The bird] answered, “Brahmin, in earlier times this pond was fed to the brim by a clear spring, had many lotus roots and flowers, and was full of fish and turtles. I formerly [lived] in dependence on it, but now it has dried up. Brahmin, you should know that I want to leave it, to nest in a place where dead cattle are collected and to live in depend- ence on it,... or dead donkeys,... or to nest in a place where dead human beings are collected and to live in dependence on it. I want to leave now, I am afraid of people.” Having had this exchange with the brahmin, the _jiu-mu_ bird left. The brahmin [remained] sitting there as before. Again, there came a vulture. Seeing it, the brahmin asked, “Wel- come, vulture, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The vulture] answered, “Brahmin, I am going from one large grave[yard] to another large grave[yard], places for [those who have been] harmed and killed. I now want to feed on the flesh of dead ele- phants, dead horses, dead cattle, and dead human beings. I want to leave now, I am afraid of people.” Then, having had this exchange with the brahmin, the vulture left. The brahmin [remained] sitting there as before. Again, there came a bird that feeds on vomit. Seeing it, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, bird that feeds on vomit, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The bird that feeds on vomit] answered, “Brahmin, did you see the vulture just now? I eat its vomit. I want to leave now, I am afraid of people.” Having had this exchange with the brahmin, the bird that feeds on vomit left. The brahmin [remained] sitting there as before. Again, there came a jackal. Having seen it, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, jackal, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?”

[The jackal] answered, “Brahmin, I am going from one deep ravine to another deep ravine, from one dense jungle to another dense jungle, and from one secluded place to another secluded place. I now want to feed on the flesh of dead elephants, dead horses, dead cattle, and dead human beings. I want to leave now, I am afraid of people.” Then, having had this exchange with the brahmin, the jackal left. The brahmin [remained] sitting there as before. Again, there came a raven. Seeing it, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, raven, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The raven] answered, “Brahmin, you crazy person, why do you ask me, ‘Where are you coming from and where do you want to go?’?” Then, having reprimanded the brahmin to his face, the raven left. The brahmin [remained] sitting there as before. Again, there came an ape. Having seen it, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, ape, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The ape] answered, “Brahmin, I am going from one garden to another garden, from one pleasure park to another pleasure park, from one forest to another forest, to drink at clear springs and eat good fruits. I want to leave now, [though] I am not afraid of people.” Having had this exchange with the brahmin, the ape left. The Buddha told the monks: I have delivered these parables and want [you] to understand their meaning. You should know that this teaching has a [deeper] meaning. What is the meaning of the parable I delivered [that concludes with] “Then, having had this exchange with the brahmin, the otter left”? Suppose there is a monk who lives in dependence on a village or town. At dawn this monk puts on his robes, takes his bowl, and enters the village to beg for food, without protecting himself, without guarding his sense faculties, without establishing right mindfulness. He never theless teaches the Dharma as taught by the Buddha or by one of [the Buddha’s] disciples. Because of this he obtains the benefit of clothing and bedding, food and drink, bed and mattress, and medicine. He is

supplied with all [he needs] to live. Having obtained these benefits, he becomes attached to them, seduced by them, not seeing the danger in them, unable to relinquish them, using them as he wishes. That monk practices bad conduct, develops unwholesome states, goes to extremes, and gives rise to harm and decay. He is not living the holy life, yet claims [to be living the] holy life. He is not a renun- ciant, yet claims [to be] a renunciant. It is just as [in the parable]: seeing the otter, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, otter, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The otter] answered, “Brahmin, in earlier times this pond was fed to the brim by a clear spring, had many lotus roots and flowers, and was full of fish and turtles. I formerly [lived] in dependence on it, but now it has dried up. Brahmin, you should know that I want to leave it, to live in a large river. I now want to leave, I am afraid of people.” The monk I spoke of is just like that. [He] is immersed in evil, unwholesome, and defiled states that are the origin of future existence and have vexation and suffering as their fruit, being the cause of birth, old age, disease, and death. Therefore, monks, do not act like that otter; do not rely on what is against the Dharma for your livelihood. With pure conduct of body, speech, and mind, dwell in secluded places, wear rag robes, always beg for food, begging for food in [proper] sequence [from house to house]. Be of few wishes and contented, abide happily, in detachment, and practice energetically, establishing right mindfulness, right atten- tiveness, right samādhi, and right wisdom. Be always detached and train in this way. What is the meaning of the parable that I delivered [that concludes with] “Then, having had this exchange with the brahmin, the _jiu-mu_ bird left”? Suppose there is a monk who lives in dependence on a village or town. At dawn this monk puts on his robes, takes his bowl, and enters the village to beg for food without protecting himself, without guarding his sense faculties, without establishing right mindfulness. He enters another’s house and teaches the Dharma as taught by the Buddha or by [one of the Buddha’s] disciples. Because of this he obtains the

benefit of clothing and bedding, food and drink, bed and mattress, and medicine, all [that he needs] to live. Having obtained these benefits, he becomes attached to them, seduced by them, not seeing the danger in them, unable to relinquish them, using them as he wishes. That monk practices bad conduct, develops unwholesome states, goes to extremes, and gives rise to harm and decay. He is not living the holy life, yet claims [to be living the] holy life. He is not a renun ciant, yet claims [to be] a renunciant. It is just as [in the parable]: seeing the jiu-mu bird, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, jiu-mu bird, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The bird] answered, “Brahmin, in earlier times this pond was fed to the brim by a clear spring, had many lotus roots and flowers, and was full of fish and turtles. I formerly [lived] in dependence on it, but now it has dried up. Brahmin, you should know that I want to leave it, to nest in a place where dead cattle are collected and to live in dependence on it,... or dead donkeys,... or to nest in a place where dead human beings are collected and to live in dependence on it. I want to leave now, I am afraid of people.” The monk I spoke of is just like that. [He] is immersed in evil, unwholesome, and defiled states that are the origin of future existence and have vexation and suffering as their fruit, being the cause of birth, old age, disease, and death. Therefore, monks, do not act like that jiu-mu bird; do not rely on what is against the Dharma for your livelihood. With pure conduct of body, speech, and mind, dwell in secluded places, wear rag robes, always beg for food, and beg for food in [proper] sequence. Be of few wishes and contented, abide happily, in detachment, and practice ener getically, establishing right mindfulness, right attentiveness, right con centration, and right wisdom. Be always detached and train in this way. What is the meaning of the parable I delivered [that concludes with] “Then, having had this exchange with the brahmin, the vulture left”? Suppose there is a monk who lives in dependence on a village or town. At dawn this monk puts on his robes, takes his bowl, and enters the village to beg for food without protecting himself, without guarding

his sense faculties, without establishing right mindfulness. He enters another’s house and teaches the Dharma as taught by the Buddha or by [one of the Buddha’s] disciples. Because of this he obtains the benefit of clothing and bedding, food and drink, bed and mattress, and medicine, all [that he needs] to live. Having obtained these benefits, he becomes attached to them, seduced by them, not seeing the danger in them, unable to relinquish them, using them as he wishes. That monk practices bad conduct, develops unwholesome states, goes to extremes, and gives rise to harm and decay. He is not living the holy life, yet claims [to be practicing] the holy life. He is not a renunciant, yet claims [to be] a renunciant. It is just as [in the parable]: seeing the vulture, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, vulture, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The vulture] answered, “Brahmin, I am going from one large grave[yard] to another large grave[yard], places for [those who have been] harmed and killed. I now want to feed on the flesh of dead elephants, dead horses, dead cattle, and dead human beings. I want to leave now, I am afraid of people.” The monk I spoke of is just like that. Therefore, monks, do not act like that vulture; do not rely on what is against the Dharma for your livelihood. With pure conduct of body, speech, and mind, dwell in secluded places, wear rag robes, always beg for food, and beg for food in [proper] sequence. Be of few wishes and contented, abide happily, in detachment, and practice energetically, establishing right mindfulness, right attentiveness, right samādhi, and right wisdom. Be always detached and train in this way. What is the meaning of the parable I delivered [that concludes with:] “Then, having had this exchange with the brahmin, the bird that feeds on vomit left”? Suppose there is a monk who lives in dependence on a village or town. At dawn this monk puts on his robes, takes his bowl, and enters the village to beg for food without protecting himself, without guarding his sense faculties, without establishing right mindfulness. He enters a nunnery and teaches the Dharma as taught by the Buddha or by one of [the Buddha’s] disciples. Those nuns then enter some houses to explain [what is] good and [what is] evil, accept the offerings of the

faithful, and bring them to the monk. Because of this he obtains the benefit of clothing and bedding, food and drink, bed and mattress, and medicine, all [that he needs] to live. Having obtained these benefits, he becomes attached to them, seduced by them, not seeing the danger in them, unable to relinquish them, using them as he wishes. That monk practices bad conduct, develops unwholesome states, goes to extremes, and gives rise to harm and decay. He is not living the holy life, yet claims [to be practicing] the holy life. He is not a renunciant, yet claims [to be] a renunciant. It is just as [in the parable]: seeing the bird that feeds on vomit, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, bird that feeds on vomit, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The bird that feeds on vomit] answered, “Brahmin, did you see the vulture just now? I eat its vomit. I want to leave now, I am afraid of people.” The monk I spoke of is just like that. Therefore, monks, do not act like that bird that feeds on vomit; do not rely on what is against the Dharma for your livelihood. With pure conduct of body, speech, and mind, dwell in secluded places, wear rag robes, always beg for food, and beg for food in [proper] sequence. Be of few wishes and contented, abide happily, in detachment, and practice energetically, establishing right mindfulness, right attentiveness, right samādhi, and right wisdom. Be always detached and train in this way. What is the meaning of the parable I delivered [that concludes with], “Then, having had this exchange with the brahmin, the jackal left”? Suppose there is a monk who dwells in dependence on a poor vil lage. If he knows that within a certain village or walled town there are many companions in the holy life who are wise and energetic, then he keeps away from it. But if he knows that within that village or walled town there are no companions in the holy life who are wise and ener getic, then he comes and stays in it for nine months or for ten months. On seeing him, monks ask, “Venerable friend, where are you dwelling?” Then he answers, “Venerable friends, I am dwelling in dependence on such-and-such a poor village or town.” Hearing this, the monks think, “This venerable one practices what is difficult to practice. Why is that? This venerable one is able to dwell

in dependence on such-and-such a poor village or town.” The monks then all respect him, revere him, and provide him with food. Because of this he obtains the benefit of clothing and bedding, food and drink, bed and mattress, and medicine, all [that he needs] to live. Having obtained these benefits, he becomes attached to them, seduced by them, not seeing the danger in them, unable to relinquish them, using them as he wishes. That monk practices bad conduct, develops unwholesome states, goes to extremes, and gives rise to harm and decay. He is not living the holy life, yet claims [to be practicing] the holy life. He is not a renunciant, yet claims [to be] a renunciant. It is just as [in the parable]: seeing the jackal, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, jackal, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The jackal] answered, “Brahmin, I am going from one deep ravine to another deep ravine, from one dense jungle to another dense jungle, and from one secluded place to another secluded place. I now want to feed on the flesh of dead elephants, dead horses, dead cattle, and dead human beings. I want to leave now, I am afraid of people.” The monk I spoke of is just like that. Therefore, monks, do not act like that jackal; do not rely on what is against the Dharma for your livelihood. With pure conduct of body, speech, and mind, dwell in secluded places, wear rag robes, always beg for food, and beg for food in [proper] sequence. Be of few wishes and contented, abide happily, in detachment, and practice energetically, establishing right mindfulness, right attentiveness, right samādhi, and right wisdom. Be always detached and train in this way. What is the meaning of the parable I delivered [that concludes with], “Then, having reprimanded the brahmin to his face, the raven left”? Suppose there is a monk who spends the rains retreat in dependence on a poor and secluded place. If he knows that within a certain village or walled town there are many companions in the holy life who are wise and energetic, he keeps away from it. But if he knows that within that village or walled town there are no companions in the holy life who are wise and energetic, he comes and stays in it for two months

or for three months. On seeing him, monks ask, “Venerable friend, where are you passing the rains retreat?” Then he answers, “Venerable friends, I am passing the rains retreat in dependence on such-and-such a poor and secluded place. I am not like those fools who are equipped with a bed and provided with the five necessities, and live surrounded by them; who, whether before noon or after noon, whether after noon or before noon, have their mouths [ready to] savor tastes and have tastes [ready] to be savored by their mouths; who beg and demand again and again.” Hearing this, those monks think, “This venerable one practices what is difficult to practice. Why is that? This venerable one is able to spend the rains retreat in dependence on such-and-such a poor and secluded place.” The monks then all respect, revere, and provide food [for him]. Because of this he obtains the benefit of clothing and bedding, food and drink, bed and mattress, and medicine, all [that he needs] to live. Having obtained these benefits, he becomes attached to them, seduced by them, not seeing the danger in them, unable to relinquish them, using them as he wishes. That monk practices bad conduct, develops unwholesome states, goes to extremes, and gives rise to harm and decay. He is not living the holy life, yet claims [to be practicing] the holy life. He is not a renunciant, yet claims [to be] a renunciant. It is just as [in the parable]: seeing the raven, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, raven, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The raven] answered, “Brahmin, you are crazy. Why do you ask me, ‘Where are you coming from and where do you want to go?’” The monk I spoke of is just like that. Therefore, monks, do not act like that raven; do not rely on what is against the Dharma for your livelihood. With pure conduct of body, speech, and mind, dwell in secluded places, wear rag robes, always beg for food, and beg for food in [proper] sequence. Be of few wishes and contented, abide happily, in detachment, and practice energetically, establishing right mindfulness, right attentiveness, right samādhi, and right wisdom. Be always detached and train in this way.

What is the meaning of the parable I delivered [that concludes with], “Then, having had this exchange with the brahmin, the ape left”? Suppose there is a monk who lives in dependence on a village or town. At dawn this monk puts on his robes, takes his bowl, and enters the village to beg for food, with his body protected, with his sense fac- ulties guarded, and with right mindfulness established. Having returned from begging for food in the village or town, and having finished his meal, put away his robe and bowl, and washed his hands and feet, in the afternoon he puts his sitting mat on his shoulder and goes to a secluded place, to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut. He arranges his sitting mat and sits down cross-legged, keeping his body straight, with right intention, with mindfulness not scattered. [He] eliminates covetousness and has no avarice in his mind. On seeing another’s wealth and means of livelihood, he does not give rise to covetousness [such as]: “I wish I could get [that].” [Thus] he purifies his mind of covetousness. Likewise, [he purifies his mind of] hatred... sloth and torpor... restlessness and worry... [he] eliminates doubt and transcends perplexity in regard to wholesome states. [Thus] he purifies his mind of doubt. Having cut off these five hindrances, the imperfections of the mind that weaken wisdom, having abandoned desires, and evil and unwholesome states... (and so on up to)... he dwells having attained the fourth absorption. When he has attained samādhi in this way, his mind being purified, without blemish, free of vexation, malleable, well established, having attained imperturbability, he directs his mind to the realization of the higher knowledge of the destruction of the taints. He then knows as it really is: “This is suffering.” He knows as it really is: “This is the arising of suffering. This is the cessation of suf- fering. This is the path [leading to] the cessation of suffering.” He knows as it really is: “These are the taints. This is the arising of the taints. This is the cessation of the taints. This is the path [leading to] the cessation of the taints.” He knows it like this. Seeing it like this, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance.

Being liberated, he knows that he is liberated, and he knows as it really is: “Birth is ended, the holy life has been established, what was to be done has been done. There will not be another existence.” It is as [in the parable]: seeing the ape, the brahmin asked, “Welcome, ape, where are you coming from and where do you want to go?” [The ape] answered, “Brahmin, I am going from one garden to another garden, from one pleasure park to another pleasure park, from one forest to another forest, to drink at clear springs and eat good fruits. I now want to leave, [though] I am not afraid of people.” The monk I spoke of is just like that. Therefore, monks, do not act like that otter, do not act like that jiu-mu [bird], do not act like that vulture, do not act like that bird that feeds on vomit, do not act like that jackal, do not act like that raven. [You] should act like that ape. Why is that? In this world a True Person, without attachment, is like that ape. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, the monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma65-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA65]]
> ◄  [[ma64-bdk]] 📜  [[ma66-bdk]] ►
