---
sutta_code: "MA67"
sutta_title:
  - "大天捺林 "
  - "Mahādeva’sMango Grove"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA67]]
> ◄  [[ma66-bdk]] 📜  [[ma68-bdk]] ►

### 67. The Discourse on Mahādeva’s Mango Grove

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying in the country of Videha together with a large company of monks. They approached Mithilā and stayed in Mahādeva’s Mango Grove. On that occasion, while on the jour- ney, the World-honored One smiled joyfully. Venerable Ānanda, on seeing the World-honored One smile, placed his palms together [in respect] toward the Buddha and said:

World-honored One, what is the reason for this smile? Tathāgatas, free from attachment and fully awakened, do not smile randomly, for no reason. May I hear the meaning [of this smile]. Then the World-honored One told him: Ānanda, in the distant past, in a different era, there was in this Mango Grove at Mithilā a king named Mahādeva. He was a wheel-turning monarch, intelligent and wise, equipped with a fourfold army to reign over the entire world, freely, as he liked. Being a righteous Dharma king he possessed seven treasures and had acquired four kinds of suc cess. Ānanda, what were the seven treasures that King Mahādeva pos sessed? They were the wheel treasure, the elephant treasure, the horse

treasure, the jewel treasure, the woman treasure, the steward treasure, and the counselor treasure—these were the seven. Ānanda, what is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of the wheel treasure? Ānanda, at one time on the fifteenth day of the [half-]month, the time for reciting the code of rules, after having bathed, King Mahādeva ascended to the main hall. [Then] the divine wheel treasure manifested, coming from the east. It had a thousand spokes, was complete in every aspect, pure and natural, not man-made, flamelike in color, bright and shining. On seeing it, King Mahādeva delighted and rejoiced, thinking to himself: The auspicious wheel treasure has arisen! The wonderful wheel treasure has arisen! I heard from the ancients thus: if a duly anointed khattiya king, on the fifteenth day of the [half-]month, the time for reciting the code of rules, after having bathed, ascends to the main hall, and the divine wheel treasure manifests, coming from the east, with a thousand spokes, complete in every aspect, pure and natural, not man-made, flamelike in color, bright and shining, then he will become a wheel-turning monarch. Will I not be a wheel-turning monarch? Ānanda, in those former times, when King Mahādeva wanted to test for himself the divine wheel treasure, he assembled his fourfold army, namely elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry. Having assembled his fourfold army, he approached the divine wheel treasure. He placed his left hand on the wheel and rotated it with his right hand, saying [to his fourfold army]: “Follow the divine wheel treasure! Follow the divine wheel treasure wherever it goes!” Ānanda, the divine wheel treasure rolled and moved toward the east and King Mahādeva followed it himself, together with his fourfold army. Wherever the divine wheel treasure stopped, there King Mahā deva took up residence with his fourfold army. Then the kings of the small countries in the east all approached King Mahādeva and said:

Welcome, your majesty! Your majesty, these lands, which are extremely large, rich, pleasant, and with many inhabitants, all belong to your majesty. May your majesty teach them the Dharma! We shall assist your majesty.

Thereupon King Mahādeva told those minor kings:

Each of you should rule his own territory by the Dharma, not by what is against the Dharma. Let your country be free of evil actions and of people of impure behavior!

Ānanda, the divine wheel treasure passed through the east and crossed the eastern ocean. Then it turned to the south... to the west... to the north.... Ānanda, as the divine wheel treasure rolled and moved on, King Mahādeva followed it himself, together with his fourfold army. Wher- ever the divine wheel treasure stopped, there King Mahādeva took up residence with his fourfold army. Then the kings of the small countries in the north all approached King Mahādeva and said:

Welcome, your majesty! Your majesty, these lands, which are extremely rich and pleasant, with many inhabitants, all belong to your majesty. May your majesty teach them the Dharma! We shall assist your majesty.

Thereupon King Mahādeva told those minor kings:

Each of you should rule his own territory by the Dharma, not by what is against the Dharma. Let your country be free of evil actions and of people of impure behavior!

Ānanda, the divine wheel treasure passed through the north and crossed the northern ocean. Then it quickly returned to its point of departure in the royal capital. While King Mahādeva was sitting in the main hall managing his properties, the divine wheel treasure remained in the sky. Such is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of the divine wheel treasure. Ānanda, what is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of

the elephant treasure? Ānanda, at one time the elephant-treasure appeared to King Mahādeva. That elephant was completely white and had the seven limbs.^169 The elephant was named Usabha.^170 Having seen it, King Mahādeva delighted and rejoiced, [thinking:] “If it can be tamed, let it be made thoroughly virtuous and good.” Afterward, Ānanda, King Mahādeva said to his elephant trainer: “Quickly tame the elephant and make it thoroughly well trained. Come and report to me when the elephant is trained.” Then, following the king’s instructions, the elephant trainer approached the elephant treasure, quickly controlled the elephant treas ure, and made it thoroughly well trained. At that time the elephant treasure was thoroughly controlled and tamed, and quickly became well trained. Just as in ancient times a fine elephant with a life span of countless hundreds and thousands of years had been thoroughly con trolled and tamed and quickly became well trained for countless hun dreds and thousands of years, so the elephant treasure was also thor oughly controlled and tamed and quickly became well trained. Ānanda, at that time the elephant trainer, having quickly controlled the elephant treasure, made it thoroughly well trained. And having trained the elephant treasure, he approached King Mahādeva and said: “May your majesty know that I have thoroughly controlled and tamed the elephant treasure and it has been trained. It is at your majesty’s disposal.” Ānanda, in those former times, when King Mahādeva tested the elephant treasure, he approached the elephant treasure in the morning as the sun rose. Mounting the elephant treasure, he traveled all over the land as far as the ocean, then quickly returned to his point of depar ture in the royal capital. Such is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s pos session of the white elephant treasure. Ānanda, what is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of the horse treasure? Ānanda, at one time the horse treasure appeared to King Mahādeva. The horse treasure was completely dark blue in color, with a head like a crow, with its body adorned with hair, and was named “King Hairy-horse.” Seeing it, King Mahādeva delighted and rejoiced, [thinking:] “If it can be tamed, let it be made thoroughly virtuous and

good.” Afterward, Ānanda, King Mahādeva said to his horse trainer: “Quickly tame the horse and make it thoroughly well trained. Come and report to me when the horse is trained.” Then, following the king’s instructions, the horse trainer approached the horse treasure, quickly controlled the horse treasure, and made it thoroughly well trained. At that time the horse treasure was thoroughly controlled and tamed, and quickly became well trained. Just as in ancient times a fine horse with a life span of countless hundreds and thousands of years had been thoroughly controlled and tamed and quickly became well trained for countless hundreds and thousands of years, so the horse treasure was also thoroughly controlled and tamed and quickly became well trained. Ānanda, at that time the horse trainer, having quickly controlled the horse treasure, made it thoroughly well trained. And having trained the horse treasure, he approached King Mahādeva and said: “May your majesty know that I have thoroughly controlled and tamed the horse treasure and it has been trained. It is at your majesty’s disposal.” Ānanda, in those former times, when King Mahādeva tested the horse treasure, he approached the horse treasure in the morning as the sun rose. Mounting the horse treasure, he traveled all over the land as far as the ocean, then quickly returned to his point of departure in the royal capital. Such is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of the dark blue horse treasure. Ānanda, what is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of the jewel treasure? Ānanda, at one time the jewel treasure appeared to King Mahādeva. The jewel treasure was bright and pure, natural, not artificial, eight-faceted, without any flaw, very well polished, and was strung on a thread of five colors, namely, blue, yellow, red, white, and black. Ānanda, at that time King Mahādeva wanted a lamp to light the inner hall of his palace, so he used the jewel treasure. Ānanda, in those former times, when King Mahādeva tested his jewel treasure, he assembled his fourfold army, that is, elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry.The fourfold army having been assembled, in the dark of night a tall banner was raised, the jewel was placed on top of it, and it was taken out to the pleasure park. The brilliance of

the jewel illuminated the fourfold army, and its light extended over an area measuring half a league in [any] direction. Such is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of the bright jewel treasure. Ānanda, what is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of the woman treasure? Ānanda, at one time the woman treasure appeared to King Mahādeva. The woman treasure had a lustrous body, splendid and pure, with a beauty surpassing that of human beings, almost like a goddess. Her appearance was graceful, and whoever saw her would be pleased. From her mouth came forth the fragrant scent of blue lotuses, and from the pores of her body came forth the scent of san dalwood. Her body was warm in winter and cool in summer. This woman sincerely served the king, her words were pleasant, and her behavior was agile, intelligent, and wise. She rejoiced in doing good. She was attentive to the king and always attached to him in thought, not to mention in bodily actions and words. Such is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of the beautiful woman treasure. Ānanda, what is [reckoned to be] King Mahādeva’s possession of the steward treasure? Ānanda, at one time the steward treasure appeared to King Mahādeva. The steward treasure was extremely rich, with immeasurable wealth, and possessed in abundance all kinds of livestock, feudatories, and manors. He was endowed in various ways with the results of meritorious actions, and had thereby acquired the divine eye. He saw all treasure vaults, [knowing] whether they were empty or not, guarded or not. He saw hoards of gold, hoards of coin, wrought treasure and unwrought treasure. Ānanda, the steward treasure approached King Mahādeva and said: “If your majesty wishes to have hoards of gold and coin, please do not worry. I will know the [right] time.” Ānanda, in those former times, when King Mahādeva tested the steward treasure, he boarded a boat, pulled out into the Ganges River, and said: “Steward, I want to have hoards of gold and coin.” The stew ard said: “May your majesty have the boat pull in to shore!” Then King Mahādeva said: “Steward, I want to have them right here! I want to have them right here!” The steward said: “Then may your majesty have the boat stop!”

Then, Ānanda, the steward treasure moved to the front of the boat. Kneeling down and reaching out with his hands, he drew up four coffers from the water, a coffer [filled] with gold, a coffer with coins, a coffer with wrought [treasure], and a coffer with unwrought [treasure]. He said: “May your majesty do with them as he wishes! The hoards of gold and coin are at your disposal. After you have made use of them, the remainder will be returned to the water.” Such is reckoned to be King Mahādeva’s possession of the steward treasure. Ānanda, what is [reckoned to be] King Mahādeva’s possession of the counselor treasure? Ānanda, at one time the counselor treasure appeared to King Mahādeva. The counselor treasure was intelligent, wise, eloquent, knowledgeable, and discriminating. For King Mahādeva the counselor treasure established [policies for] the benefit of the present generation and encouraged peace and stability for it, for King Mahā - deva he established [policies for] the benefit of future generations and encouraged peace and stability for them. He planned for the benefit of present and future generations and encouraged peace and stability for them. For King Mahādeva the counselor treasure assembled and dis- missed the army as the king wished. He desired to prevent King Mahā - deva’s fourfold army from becoming fatigued and aimed to help. He did the same in regard to the officials. Such is reckoned to be King Mahā deva’s possession of the counselor treasure. These, Ānanda, are reckoned to be the seven treasures that King Mahādeva possessed. Ānanda, what are the four kinds of success acquired by King Mahā deva? King Mahādeva had an extremely long life span. As a prince, he played games for eighty-four thousand years. He was the king of a small country for eighty-four thousand years, and the king of a large country for eighty-four thousand years. [Then,] having shaved off his hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and gone forth, he practiced the path for eighty-four thousand years. As a royal sage,^171 he practiced the holy life, dwelling here at Mithilā in Mahādeva’s Mango Grove. Ānanda, that King Mahādeva had an extremely long life span; [that] as a prince, he played games for eighty-four thousand years;

[that] he was king of a small country for eighty-four thousand years, and king of a large country for eighty-four thousand years; [that] having shaved off his hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and gone forth, he practiced the path for eighty-four thousand years; [that] as a royal sage, he practiced the holy life, dwelling here at Mithilā in Mahādeva’s Mango Grove—this is reckoned to be the first kind of success of King Mahādeva. Again, Ānanda, King Mahādeva was free of illness, he was endowed with an even digestion, [his digestion became] neither [too] cold nor [too] hot, [was] comfortable and non-afflictive, so that whatever he ate and drank was well digested. Ānanda, that King Mahādeva was free of illness, that he had developed a balanced manner of eating, [he ate things] neither too hot not too cold, comfortable and peaceful, so that whatever he ate and drank was well digested—this is reckoned to be the second kind of success of King Mahādeva. Again, Ānanda, King Mahādeva had a lustrous body, splendid and pure, with a beauty surpassing that of human beings, almost like a god. He was graceful and handsome, so that whoever saw him was pleased. Ānanda, that King Mahādeva had a lustrous body, fresh and bright, with a beauty surpassing that of human beings, almost like a god; and that he was graceful and handsome, so that whoever saw him was pleased—this is reckoned to be the third kind of success of King Mahādeva. Again, Ānanda, King Mahādeva always had thoughts of affection for brahmins and householders, just as a father thinks of his children; and the brahmins and householders, too, greatly respected King Mahā deva, just as children respect their father. Ānanda, once while in his pleasure park, King Mahādeva told his charioteer, “Drive slowly. I wish to see the brahmins and householders longer.” The brahmins and householders, too, told their charioteers, “Drive slowly. We wish to see King Mahādeva longer.” Ānanda, that King Mahādeva always had thoughts of affection for brahmins and householders just as a father thinks of his children; and that the brahmins and householders, too, greatly respected King Mahādeva, just as children respect their father—this is reckoned to be

the fourth kind of success of King Mahādeva. These, Ānanda, are reck- oned to be the four kinds of success that King Mahādeva had acquired. Ānanda, at a later time King Mahādeva told his barber, “If you see gray hairs growing on my head, then tell me.” Thereupon, after some time, while washing the king’s head, the barber saw that some gray hairs had grown. Following the king’s instructions, on seeing them he said: “May your majesty know that the divine messengers have arrived! Gray hairs are growing on your head.” King Mahādeva told his barber, “Pull out the gray hairs gently with golden tweezers and place them in my hand!” Then, following the king’s instructions, the barber pulled out the gray hairs gently with golden tweezers and placed them in the king’s hand. Ānanda, holding the gray hairs in his hand, King Mahādeva said in verse:

Gray hairs are growing on my head. My life is going into decline. The divine messengers have come. It is time for me to practice the path.

Ānanda, having seen the gray hairs, King Mahādeva told the crown prince:

Crown prince, you should know that the divine messengers have come; gray hairs are growing on my head. Crown prince, I have enjoyed worldly pleasures. Now I will seek divine pleasures. Crown prince, I want to shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path. Crown prince, I now entrust to you the four continents of the world. You should rule by the Dharma, not by what is against the Dharma. Let the country be free of evil actions and of people with impure behavior! Later on, crown prince, when the divine mes sengers arrive and you see that gray hairs have grown on your head, then you should in turn entrust the country’s affairs to your crown prince and instruct him properly. Having entrusted the coun try to your crown prince, you too should shave off your hair and

beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path. Crown prince, I now pass on to you this transmitted Dharma. Likewise, you should in turn pass on this transmitted Dharma. Do not let the people fall into extremes! Crown prince, what do I mean by saying: “I now pass on to you this transmitted Dharma. Like wise, you should in turn pass on this transmitted Dharma. Do not let the people fall into extremes”? Crown prince, if in this country this transmission of Dharma is broken and no longer continues, this is reckoned to be “letting the people fall into extremes.” For this reason, crown prince, I now pass [this Dharma] on to you. Crown prince, as I have passed this transmitted Dharma on to you, you should in turn likewise pass on this transmitted Dharma. Do not let the people fall into extremes! Ānanda, having entrusted the country’s affairs to the crown prince and instructed him properly, King Mahādeva shaved off his hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to practice the path. As a royal sage, he practiced the holy life, dwelling here at Mithilā, in King Mahādeva’s Mango Grove. [The crown prince] also became a wheel-turning monarch, pos sessing the seven treasures, and acquiring the four kinds of success. What are the seven treasures that he possessed and the four kinds of success that he acquired?... (as described above) ... These are the seven treasures and the four kinds of success. Ānanda, later on, this wheel-turning monarch similarly told his barber: “If you see gray hairs growing on my head, then tell me!” Thereupon, after some time, while washing the king’s head, the barber saw that some gray hairs had grown. Following the king’s instructions, on seeing them he said: “May your majesty know that the divine mes sengers have arrived! Gray hairs are growing on your head.” The wheel-turning monarch told his barber: “Pull out the gray hairs gently with golden tweezers and place them in my hand!” Then, following the king’s instructions, the barber pulled out the gray hairs gently with golden tweezers and placed them in the king’s hand.

Ānanda, while holding the gray hairs in his hand, the wheel-turning monarch said in verse:

Gray hairs are growing on my head. My life is going into decline. The divine messengers have come. It is time for me to practice the path.

Ānanda, having seen the gray hairs, the wheel-turning monarch told his crown prince:

Crown prince, you should know that the divine messengers have come; gray hairs are growing on my head. Crown prince, I have enjoyed worldly pleasures. Now I will seek divine pleasures. Crown prince, I want to shave off my hair and beard, don the yel low robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path. I now entrust to you the four continents of the world. You should rule by the Dharma, not by what is against the Dharma. Let the country be free of evil actions and of people with impure behavior! Later on, crown prince, when the divine messengers arrive and you see that gray hairs have grown on your head, then you should in turn entrust the country’s affairs to your crown prince and instruct him properly. Having entrusted the country to your crown prince, you in turn should shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path. Crown prince, I now pass on to you this transmitted Dharma. Likewise, you should in turn pass on this transmitted Dharma. Do not let the people fall into extremes! What do I mean by saying: “I now pass on to you this transmitted Dharma. Likewise, you should in turn pass on this transmitted Dharma. Do not let the peo ple fall into extremes”? Crown prince, if in this country this trans mission of Dharma is broken and no longer continues, this is reck oned to be “letting the people fall into extremes.” For this reason, crown prince, I now pass [this Dharma] on to you. Crown prince, as I have passed this transmitted Dharma

on to you, you should in turn likewise pass on this transmitted Dharma. Do not let the people fall into extremes! Ānanda, having entrusted the country’s affairs to the crown prince and instructed him properly, the wheel-turning monarch shaved off his hair and beard, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to practice the path. As a royal sage, he practiced the holy life, dwelling here at Mithilā in King Mahādeva’s Mango Grove. Thus, Ānanda, from son to son, from grandson to grandson, from generation to generation, from tradition to tradition,^172 eighty-four thousand wheel-turning monarchs in succession shaved off their hair and beards, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to prac tice the path. As royal sages, they practiced the holy life, dwelling here at Mithilā, in King Mahādeva’s Mango Grove. The last of those kings, named Nimi, was a righteous Dharma king, who practiced the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma. He held a Dharma feast^173 for the sake of his crown prince, queen, concubines, maids, subjects, renunciants, brahmins and [all sentient beings] including insects, on the eighth day and the fourteenth and fif teenth days of each [half-]month, when he practiced charity, providing those in need, the renunciants and brahmins, [as well as] those in poverty, those without kin, and beggars from far away, with food and drink, clothes and bedding, vehicles, flower garlands, scattered flowers, perfume, dwellings, mattresses, woolen blankets, shawls, servants, and lamps. At that time, the thirty-three gods, who were sitting together in the Sudhamma Hall, extolled and praised King Nimi thus: Friends, the people of Videha are endowed with great benefits and great merits. Why is that? The last [of their] kings, named Nimi, is a righteous Dharma king who practices the Dharma according to the Dharma. He holds a Dharma feast for the sake of his crown prince, queen, concubines, maids, subjects, renunciants, brahmins, and [all sentient beings] including insects, on the eighth day and the fourteenth and fifteenth days of each [half-]month, when he practices charity, providing those in need, the renunciants and

brahmins, [as well as] those in poverty, those without kin, and beggars from far away, with food and drink, clothes and bedding, vehicles, flower garlands, scattered flowers, perfume, dwellings, mattresses, woolen blankets, shawls, servants, and lamps.

At that time Sakka, king of the gods, was also among them. Then Sakka, king of the gods, addressed the thirty-three gods, “Friends, would you like to see King Nimi right here?” The thirty-three gods replied, “Kosiya, we would like to see King Nimi right here.” At that time, just as quickly as a strong man might bend or stretch his arm, Sakka suddenly vanished from the heaven of the thirty-three and arrived at King Nimi’s palace. There, having seen Sakka, king of the gods, King Nimi asked, “Who are you?” Sakka replied, “Great king, have you heard of Sakka, king of the gods?” He replied, “Yes, I have heard of Sakka.” Sakka said: I am he. Great king, you are endowed with great benefits and great merits. Why is that? The thirty-three gods sat together in the Sudhamma Hall on your account and praised you, exclaiming: “Friends, the people of Videha are endowed with great benefits and great merits. Why is that? The last [of their] kings, named Nimi, is a righteous Dharma king who practices the Dharma according to the Dharma. He holds a Dharma feast for the sake of his crown prince, queen, concubines, maids, subjects, renunciants, brahmins, and [all sentient beings] including insects, on the eighth day and the fourteenth and fifteenth days of each [half-]month, practicing charity, providing those in need, the renunciants and brahmins, [as well as] those in poverty, those without kin, and beggars from far away, with food and drink, clothes and bedding, vehicles, flower garlands, scattered flowers, perfume, dwellings, mattresses, woolen blankets, shawls, servants, and lamps.” Great king, would you like to see the thirty-three gods?

He replied, “I would like to see them.” Sakka told King Nimi: I shall return to [my] heaven and order the preparation of a chariot drawn by a thousand elephants. The great king can board that char iot and enjoy the ride while ascending to heaven. Then King Nimi expressed his assent to Sakka, king of the gods, by remaining silent. Sakka, understanding that King Nimi had assented by remaining silent, just as quickly as a strong man might bend or stretch his arm, suddenly vanished from King Nimi’s palace and returned to the heaven of the thirty-three. Having arrived, Sakka told the charioteer: Quickly prepare a chariot drawn by a thousand elephants and go to receive King Nimi. Having arrived, you should say: “Great king, may you know that Sakka, king of the gods, has sent this chariot drawn by a thousand elephants to receive you! May you board this chariot and enjoy the ride while ascending to heaven!” After the king has boarded the chariot, you should ask: “By which route would you like me to drive you: by the route on which evil doers experience the results of evil or by the route on which doers of good experience the results of good?” Thereupon, following Sakka’s instructions, the charioteer prepared a chariot drawn by a thousand elephants and went to King Nimi. Having arrived there, he said: Great king, may you know that Sakka has sent this chariot drawn by a thousand elephants to receive you! May you board this chariot and enjoy the ride while ascending to heaven! Then, after King Nimi had boarded the chariot, the charioteer addressed the king again: By which route would you like me to drive you: by the route on which evildoers experience the results of evil or by the route on which doers of good experience the results of good?

Then King Nimi told the charioteer:

You may drive me between the two routes: [the route on which] evildoers experience the results of evil and [the route on which] doers of good experience the results of good.

So the charioteer drove the king between the two routes: [the route on which] evildoers experience the results of evil and [the route on which] doers of good experience the results of good. Then the thirty-three gods saw King Nimi coming in the distance. Seeing him, they praised him, [saying:] “Welcome, great king! Wel- come, great king! May you dwell together with the thirty-three gods and enjoy yourself!” Then King Nimi addressed the thirty-three gods in verse: Just like riding in a borrowed chariot, A vehicle acquired temporarily, So is this place; That is to say, it belongs to others. I shall return to Mithilā, [Where] I shall do immeasurable good, Because this results in rebirth in heaven. Making merit is provision [for rebirth in heaven].

Ānanda, do you regard King Mahādeva on that former occasion as someone other [than me]? Do not think like this! You should know that he was me. Ānanda, on that former occasion I and the eighty-four thousand wheel-turning monarchs descending from me in succession—from son to son, from grandson to grandson, from generation to generation— shaved off our hair and beards, donned the yellow robe, left home out of faith, and went forth to practice the path. As royal sages, we practiced the holy life dwelling here at Mithilā in King Mahādeva’s Mango Grove. Ānanda, at that time I benefited myself, benefited others, and ben- efited many people. I had compassion for the whole world and I sought prosperity, benefit, peace and happiness for gods and human beings. The teaching I gave at that time did not lead to the ultimate, was not

the ultimate purity, not the ultimate holy life, not the ultimate completion of the holy life. Not having fulfilled the holy life, I did not at that time become free from birth, old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and distress, and I was not able to attain liberation from all suffering. Ānanda, I have now appeared in this world as a Tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened, perfect in knowledge and conduct, a Well-gone One, a knower of the world, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and human beings, a buddha, a Fortunate One. I now benefit myself, benefit others, benefit many people. I have compassion for the whole world, and I seek prosperity, benefit, peace, and happiness for gods and human beings. My teaching of the Dharma has now reached fulfillment, I have fulfilled my purification, fulfilled the holy life. Having fulfilled the holy life, I am now free from birth, old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and distress. I have now attained lib eration from all suffering. Ānanda, I now pass on to you this transmitted Dharma. Likewise, you should in turn pass on this transmitted Dharma. Do not let the Buddha’s lineage be broken! What is this transmitted Dharma that I now pass on to you, this transmitted Dharma that you should in turn pass on, not letting the Buddha’s lineage be broken? Ānanda, it is the noble eightfold path consisting of right view... (and so on up to)... right samādhi. This, Ānanda, is the transmitted Dharma that I now pass on to you, the transmitted Dharma that you should in turn pass on, not letting the Buddha’s lineage be broken. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Venerable Ānanda and the [other] monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma67-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA1.1]], [[EA50.4]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA89]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA59]], [[MA70]], [[MN129]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA67]]
> ◄  [[ma66-bdk]] 📜  [[ma68-bdk]] ►
