---
sutta_code: "MA69"
sutta_title:
  - "Nivāpa Sutta "
  - "Fodder"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA69]]
> ◄  [[ma68-bdk]] 📜  [[ma70-bdk]] ►

### 69. The Discourse with the Thirty Analogies

Thus have I heard: At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary, together with a large company of monks, who were observing the rains retreat. At that time, on the fifteenth day [of the half-month], the time for reciting the code of rules, the World-honored One sat down on a seat arranged before the monks. Having sat down, the World-honored One entered meditative absorption and investigated the monks’ minds. Thereupon, the World-honored One saw that the company of monks was sitting in meditation silently, in deep silence, without sloth or torpor, through having eliminated the hindrances; [he saw that] the company of monks was seated in [meditation] that was profound, extremely profound, tranquil, extremely tranquil, excellent, extremely excel- lent. At that time Venerable Sāriputta was also among them. Then the World- honored One said: Sāriputta, the company of monks is sitting in meditation silently, in deep silence, without sloth or torpor, through having eliminated the hindrances. The company of monks is seated in [meditation that is] pro- found, extremely profound, tranquil, extremely tranquil, excellent, extremely excellent. Sāriputta, who can respect and support [such a] company of monks? Thereupon, Venerable Sāriputta got up from his seat, arranged his robe so as to bare one shoulder, placed his palms together [in respect] toward the Buddha, and said:

So it is, World-honored One. The company of monks is sitting in med itation silently, in deep silence, without sloth or torpor, through having eliminated the hindrances. The company of monks is seated in [med itation] that is profound, extremely profound, tranquil, extremely tran quil, excellent, extremely excellent. World-honored One, nobody [else] can respect and support [such a] company of monks. Only the World-honored One can respect and support the Dharma and the company of monks, as well as morality, diligence, charity, and samādhi. Only the World-honored One can respect and support them. The World-honored One said: So it is, Sāriputta, so it is. Nobody [else] can respect and support [such a] company of monks. Only the World-honored One can respect and support the Dharma and the company of monks, as well as morality, diligence, charity, and samādhi. Only the World-honored One can respect and support them. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have various adorn ments: colorful silk and woolen fabrics, finger rings, armlets, elbow ornaments, necklaces, and garlands of gold and jewels; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have moral virtue as their adornment. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with moral virtue as their adornment, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have five insignia: sword, parasol, royal headdress, fly whisk with jeweled handle, and ornate sandals, whereby they protect their bodies and obtain well being; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns observe the precepts, thereby protecting the holy life. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with observance of the precepts, thereby protecting the holy life, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have wardens; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have guarding the six senses as their warden. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with guarding the six senses as their warden, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome.

Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have gatekeepers who are intelligent, wise, discriminating, and comprehending; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have right mindfulness as their gatekeeper. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with right mindfulness as their gatekeeper, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have pleasant baths brimming with fresh spring water; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have mental calm as their bathing water. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with mental calm as their bathing water, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have bath attendants who regularly bathe them; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have good friends as their bath attendants. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with good friends as their bath attendants, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have perfumes to apply to their bodies: perfume of deodar, of aloe, of sandalwood, of olibanum, of clove, or of eupatorium; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have moral virtue as their perfume. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with moral virtue as their perfume, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have good garments made of linen, of fine silk, of fine wool, or of choice antelope hide; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have shame and scruples as their garments. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with shame and scruples as their garments, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have good beds and seats, very wide and high; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have the four absorptions as their beds and seats. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the four absorptions as their beds and seats, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have skillful barbers who dress their hair; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have right mind- fulness as their barber. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with

right mindfulness as their barber, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have delicate and won derful food with a variety of flavors; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have joy as their food. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with joy as their food, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have a variety of drinks: mango juice, rose-apple juice, sugarcane juice, grape juice, and intoxicating drinks; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have the flavor of the Dharma as their drink. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the flavor of the Dharma as their drink, then they are able to aban don evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have excellent garlands made of blue lotus flowers, campaka flowers, jasmine flowers, great flowered-jasmine flowers, and pearl bush flowers; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have the three kinds of samādhi as their garlands: empti ness [samādhi], desireless [samādhi], and signless [concen tration]. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the three kinds of samādhi as their garlands, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have as their dwellings halls or lofty buildings; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have as their dwellings the three abodes: the abode of gods, the abode of Brahmās, and the abode of noble ones. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the three abodes as their dwellings, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have guardians, that is to say, guardians who protect their homes; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have wisdom as that which protects their home. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with wisdom as that which protects their home, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have four kinds of rev enues collected from all the towns of the country: one part to support the king, the queen and the palace women; a second part to supportthe

crown prince and the ministers; a third part to support the entire pop- ulation of the country; and a fourth part to support renunciants and brahmins; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have the four establishments of mindfulness as their revenue. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the four establishments of mindfulness as their revenue, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have a fourfold army: elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have the four right abandonments as [their] fourfold army. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the four right abandonments as [their] fourfold army, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have various vehicles: elephant carriages, horse carriages, carts, palanquins; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have the four bases of supernormal power as their vehicles. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the four bases of supernormal power as their vehicles, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have various chariots decorated with various colorful adornments made from choice patterned hides of lions, tigers, and panthers; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have serenity and insight as their chariots. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with serenity and insight as their chariots, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have charioteers, that is to say drivers of chariots; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have right mindfulness as their charioteer. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with right mindfulness as their charioteer, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have very lofty banners; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have their own mind as their lofty banner. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with [having] their own mind as their lofty banner, then they are able to abandon evil and prac- tice what is wholesome.

Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have good roads which are even and wide and lead directly to their pleasure park; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have the noble eightfold path as their road which is even and wide and leads directly to nirvana. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the noble eightfold path as their road, which is even and wide and leads directly to nirvana, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have commanders who are intelligent, wise, discriminating, and comprehending; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have wisdom as their commander. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with wisdom as their commander, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have great palaces, very wide and lofty; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have wisdom as their great palace. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with wis dom as their great palace, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers ascend to a lofty palace and watch people below the palace going and returning, walking, jump ing, standing, sitting, or lying down; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns ascend to the lofty palace of unsurpassed wisdom in order to contem plate their own minds as upright, malleable, delighted, and detached. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the lofty palace of unsurpassed wisdom in order to contemplate their own minds as upright, malleable, delighted, and detached, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have genealogists, who are conversant with the family lineage; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have the fourfold noble lineage as their genealogist. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with the fourfold noble lineage as their genealogist, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have famous expert physicians who can cure many diseases; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have right mindfulness as their expert physician. If, Sāriputta, monks

and nuns are endowed with right mindfulness as their expert physician, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have formal royal couches, which are covered with woolen blankets, draped with brocades and fine silk fabric, with lined and quilted coverlets, and with cushions [made of] antelope hide at both ends; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have unobstructed samādhi as their formal royal couches. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with unobstructed samādhi as their formal royal couches, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers have precious jewels; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have imperturbable liberation of the mind as their precious jewel. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with imperturbable liberation of the mind as their precious jewel, then they are able to abandon evil and practice what is wholesome. Sāriputta, just as kings and senior ministers bathe thoroughly and apply fine perfume to their bodies, to make themselves extremely pure; so, Sāriputta, monks and nuns have contemplation of their own minds to make themselves extremely pure. If, Sāriputta, monks and nuns are endowed with contemplation of their own minds to make themselves extremely pure, then they can respect and support the World-honored One, the Dharma, and the company of monks, as well as morality, dili- gence, charity, and samādhi. This is what the Buddha said. Having heard the Buddha’s words, Ven- erable Sāriputta and the [other] monks were delighted and remembered them well.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma69-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M i 151 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA69]]
> ◄  [[ma68-bdk]] 📜  [[ma70-bdk]] ►
