---
sutta_code: "MA72"
sutta_title:
  - "長壽王本起 "
  - "History of King Long Life Span"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA72]]
> ◄  [[ma71-bdk]] 📜  [[ma73-bdk]] ►

### 72. The Discourse on the History of King Long Life Span

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park. At that time a number of monks from Kosambī were fighting and quarreling with one another.^2 Then the World-honored One told the monks from Kosambī:

Monks, don’t fight and quarrel! Why is that? If one [tries] by quarreling to stop quarreling, In the end one will not see it stop. Only by patience can quarreling be stopped. This is a principle that should be honored. Why is that? In the distant past there was a king of Kosala named Long Life Span, and there was a king of Kāsi named Brahmadatta. These two kings were constantly quarreling and battling with each other. Then King Brahmadatta of Kāsi assembled his fourfold army—his elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry. Having assembled his fourfold army, King Brahmadatta of Kāsi personally led his army’s approach, intending to do battle with King Long Life Span of Kosala. King Long Life Span of Kosala heard, “King Brahmadatta of Kāsi has assembled his fourfold army—his elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry—and, having assembled his fourfold army, is coming to do battle with me.” Having heard this, King Long Life Span of Kosala also assembled his fourfold army—his elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry— and, having assembled his fourfold army, King Long Life Span of Kosala personally led his army out to the border [between the two countries]. He

had [the army] line up in battle array and did battle, devastating and destroying [the enemy]. Then King Long Life Span of Kosala captured the entire fourfold army of King Brahmadatta—his elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry—and he even captured alive King Brahmadatta of Kāsi himself. Having captured him, he then set him free, saying, “You are a man in dis tress. I now pardon you. Henceforth don’t do this again!” A second and a third time King Brahmadatta of Kāsi assembled his fourfold army—his elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry. Having assembled his fourfold army, King Brahmadatta of Kāsi personally led his army’s approach, to do battle with King Long Life Span of Kosala. King Long Life Span of Kosala heard, “King Brahmadatta of Kāsi has assembled his fourfold army—his elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry—and, having assembled his fourfold army, is coming to do battle with me.” Having heard this, King Long Life Span of Kosala had this thought, “I have already conquered [King Brahmadatta]. Why do I need to conquer him again? I have already defeated him. Why defeat him further? I have already harmed him. Why do I need to harm him again? Even with just a bow I could defeat him.” Having had this thought, King Long Life Span of Kosala remained at ease and did not again assemble his fourfold army—his elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry—and did not personally [lead its] approach. Then King Brahmadatta of Kāsi was able to approach and destroy [the enemy], and he captured the entire fourfold army of King Long Life Span of Kosala—his elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry. Then King Long Life Span of Kosala heard, “King Brahmadatta of Kāsi approached and captured my entire fourfold army—my elephant troops, cavalry, chariot troops, and infantry.” He further had this thought, “Fighting is very odd! Fighting is very evil! Why is that? Having con quered, one will conquer again. Having defeated, one will defeat again. Having harmed, one will harm again. Let me now rather go to Benares, accompanied only by my one wife, riding together in one chariot.” There upon King Long Life Span of Kosala set out for Benares, accompanied only by his one wife, riding together in one chariot.^3

King Long Life Span of Kosala had another thought, “Let me now rather go from village to village and town to town, to learn through hearing much.” Having had this thought, King Long Life Span of Kosala went from village to village and town to town, learning through hearing much. Because of his vast learning, he changed his name to Master Long Life Span. Master Long Life Span further had this thought, “Whatever is to be learned, I have now already gained. Let me go to the city of Benares, stop in the streets and alleys and, with a cheerful face, perform fine music. In this way the noble families of Benares, on hearing me, will be greatly delighted and entertained.” Having had this thought, Master Long Life Span went to the city of Benares, stopped in the streets and alleys and, with a cheerful face, per- formed fine music. In this way the noble families of Benares, on hearing him, were greatly delighted and entertained. Then the outer [circle] of the retainers of King Brahmadatta of Kāsi heard about him, the intermediate [circle],... the inner [circle] of retainers, and the brahmin chaplain ( _purohita_ ) all heard about him in turn. On hearing about him, the brahmin chaplain summoned him to come and visit. Then Master Long Life Span approached the brahmin chaplain and, standing before him with a cheerful face, he performed fine music. On hearing it, the brahmin chaplain was greatly delighted and entertained. Then the brahmin chaplain told Master Long Life Span, “From now on you can live in reliance on me. I shall provide for you.” Master Long Life Span said, “Venerable sir, I have a wife, what about her?” The brahmin chaplain said in reply, “Master, you can bring her along to stay in my house in reliance on me. I shall provide for her [too].” Then Master Long Life Span took his wife to the house of the brahmin chaplain to live in reliance on him, and the brahmin chaplain provided for them.^4 At a later time Master Long Life Span’s wife, [who was pregnant,] experienced in her mind sadness and anxiety, thinking, “I wish that the fourfold army would parade in battle array, proceeding slowly in due order with their swords unsheathed. I would like to review [the army] and then be able to drink the water from the [ritual] sharpening of the swords.” Having had this thought, the wife of Master Long Life Span said to him, “In my mind I am experiencing sadness and anxiety, and I have the thought:

‘I wish that the fourfold army would parade in battle array, proceeding slowly in due order with their swords unsheathed. I would like to review [the army] and then be able to drink the water from the sharpening of the swords.’” Master Long Life Span told his wife, “My dear, don’t have such thoughts! Why is that? We have been destroyed by King Brahmadatta. My dear, for what purpose should you wish to see the fourfold army parad ing in battle array, proceeding slowly with their swords unsheathed, [and why should you think]: ‘I would like to review [the army] and then be able to drink the water from the sharpening of the swords’?” His wife replied, “Honorable [husband], if I am able to get [that water], I shall live. If I do not get it, I will certainly die, without a doubt.” Then Master Long Life Span approached the brahmin chaplain and, standing before him with a sad face, performed music with unpleasant, subdued sounds. On hearing it the brahmin chaplain was not delighted.^5 At this the brahmin chaplain asked, “Master, formerly you stood before me and, with a cheerful face, performed fine music. On hearing it I was greatly delighted and entertained. Why do you now stand before me with a sad face and perform music with unpleasant, subdued sounds, such that on hearing it I am not delighted? Master Long Life Span, isn’t your body afflicted by some disease? Isn’t your mind sad and anxious?” Master Long Life Span replied, “Venerable sir, my body is not afflicted, but my mind is sad and anxious. Venerable sir, my wife is experiencing in her mind sadness and anxiety, thinking, ‘I wish that the fourfold army would parade in battle array, proceeding slowly in due order with their swords unsheathed. I would like to review [the army] and then be able to drink the water from the sharpening of the swords.’ “I replied to my wife, ‘My dear, don’t have such thoughts! Why is that? Given our present situation, my dear, for what purpose should you go to see the fourfold army parading in battle array, proceeding slowly with their swords unsheathed; [why should you think:] ‘I would like to review [the army] and then be able to drink the water from the sharpening of the swords?’ “My wife replied, ‘Honorable [husband], if I am able to get [that water], I shall live. If I do not get it I will certainly die, without a doubt.’ Venerable sir, if my wife is not completely well, I do not function properly.”

The brahmin chaplain asked, “Master, can I visit your wife?” [Master Long Life Span] replied, “You can visit her, honorable sir.” Then the brahmin chaplain, accompanied by Master Long Life Span, approached the wife. At that time the wife of Master Long Life Span was pregnant with a virtuous son. The brahmin chaplain, seeing that Master Long Life Span’s wife was pregnant with a virtuous son, knelt down with his right knee on the floor, extended his hands with his palms joined toward the wife of Master Long Life Span, and said three times, “A king of Kosala will be born, a king of Kosala will be born!” He ordered his servants, “Let no one know this!” The brahmin chaplain said, “Master, don’t be sad or anxious. I can ensure that your wife gets to see the fourfold army parading in battle array, proceeding slowly in due order with their swords unsheathed, and then she will be able to drink the water from the sharpening of the swords.” Then the brahmin chaplain went to King Brahmadatta of Kāsi. On arriving he said, “Your Majesty should know: an auspicious star has appeared. May Your Majesty order the fourfold army to parade in battle array, proceeding slowly in due order with their swords unsheathed, to show off the might of the army as they perform the [ritual] sharpening of the swords in water. May Your Majesty himself go out to observe it. Your Majesty, doing this will certainly be auspicious.” Then King Brahmadatta of Kāsi ordered the army chief, “Officer, you should know: an auspicious star has appeared. Officer, quickly order the fourfold army to parade in battle array, proceeding slowly in due order with their swords unsheathed, to show off the might of the army as they perform the sharpening of the swords in water. I myself will go out to observe it. Doing this will certainly be auspicious.” Then the army chief, on receiving this order from the king, ordered the fourfold army to parade in battle array, proceeding slowly in due order with their swords unsheathed, to show off the might of the army as they performed the sharpening of the swords in water. [King] Brahmadatta himself went out to observe it. As a result, the wife of Master Long Life Span got to see the fourfold army parading in battle array, proceeding slowly in due order with their

swords unsheathed, showing off the might of the army. She was also able to drink the water from the sharpening of the swords. Once she had drunk the water from the sharpening of the swords, her sadness and anxiety dis appeared and she soon gave birth to a virtuous son. When he was named he was called Prince Long Life. He was entrusted to [other] people to raise him secretly and gradually grew up to adulthood. Like any anointed warrior king who governs in the world on having acquired a large territory, Prince Long Life [learned] various types of skills, such as riding elephants and riding horses, taming and controlling them, galloping, shooting for sport, boxing, casting nets and casting hooks, riding chariots, and riding in carriages. He mastered all the various fine skills in this way and triumphed in various types of subtle contests. He was unrivaled in the world in his determined resolution and outstanding in his intelligence. [Although he remained] well concealed and disguised, there was nothing that he did not fully master.^6 Then [King] Brahmadatta heard that King Long Life Span of Kosala had changed his name, becoming a “master,” and was staying in the city of Benares.^7 [King] Brahmadatta ordered his officers, “Officers, go quickly and seize King Long Life Span of Kosala, bind his hands behind him, put him on a donkey, and beat a broken drum that makes a sound like a don key’s braying. Having announced this order widely, lead him out through the southern gate, have him sit beneath a tall signpost, and interrogate him closely.” Having received this order, the officers promptly went and seized King Long Life Span of Kosala, bound his hands behind him, put him on a don key and, beating a broken drum that made a sound like a donkey’s braying, they announced the order widely and led him out through the southern gate. Seating him beneath a tall signpost, they interrogated him closely.^8 At that time Prince Long Life followed his father, staying behind him or to his left or right. He said to his father, “Your Majesty, don’t be afraid! Your Majesty, don’t be afraid! I am here. I will certainly be able to rescue you. I will certainly be able to rescue you.” King Long Life Span of Kosala replied, “Be patient, Prince! Be patient, Prince! Don’t let the bondage of resentment arise. Instead you should practice loving-kindness.”

The people heard King Long Life Span speaking these words and asked the king, “What are you talking about?” The king replied to the people, “This prince is intelligent; he will cer- tainly understand my words.” Then Prince Long Life appealed to the noble families of the city of Benares, “Noble sirs, make merit by practicing generosity and dedicate it to King Long Life Span of Kosala: ‘Through the merit of this generosity, may King Long Life Span of Kosala be well and at ease! May he be set free!’” Then the noble families of the city of Benares, on being appealed to by Prince Long Life, made merit by practicing generosity and dedicated it to King Long Life Span of Kosala: “Through the merit of this generosity, may King Long Life Span of Kosala be well and at ease! May he be set free!” King Brahmadatta of Kāsi heard that the noble families of Benares were making merit by practicing generosity and dedicating it to King Long Life Span of Kosala, saying, “Through the merit of this generosity, may King Long Life Span of Kosala be well and at ease! May he be set free!” On hearing this he became very fearful and all the hairs on his body stood on end. [He said,] “Isn’t this causing these noble families of the city of Benares to rebel against me? Just let me settle this issue! Let me now, first of all, swiftly put an end to this issue!” Then King Brahmadatta of Kāsi ordered his servants, “Quickly go and kill King Long Life Span of Kosala! Cut him into seven pieces!” Having received this order, the servants quickly went and killed King Long Life Span of Kosala and cut him into seven pieces. Then Prince Long Life appealed to the noble families of the city of Benares, “Noble sirs, look at this! King Brahmadatta of Kāsi is cruel and immoral. He captured my father, King Long Life Span of Kosala, an inno- cent man; he seized his country and the wealth in his storehouses; he bru- tally and unjustly had him killed and cut into seven pieces. Come, noble sirs. With new silk cloth bring together [the remains of] my father. Anoint the seven pieces of the corpse all over with fragrance. Collect fragrant wood, cremate him, and install [the ashes] in a shrine. “Deliver this message to [King] Brahmadatta on my behalf: ‘Prince Long Life of Kosala says this, “Do you not fear that the descendants [of King Long Life Span] will later give you trouble?”’”

Then, urged on by Prince Long Life, the noble families of the city of Benares brought together the [king’s] remains using new silk cloth, taking the seven pieces of his corpse and anointing them all over with fragrance. They collected fragrant wood, cremated him, and installed [the ashes] in a shrine.^9 Then they delivered this message to [King] Brahmadatta: “Prince Long Life of Kosala says this, ‘Do you not fear that the descendants [of King Long Life Span] will later give you trouble?’” Then the [bereaved] wife of King Long Life Span said to Prince Long Life, “You should know that King Brahmadatta of Kāsi is cruel and immoral. He captured your father, King Long Life Span of Kosala, an innocent man; he seized his country and the wealth in his storehouses; he brutally and unjustly had him killed and cut into seven pieces. Come, Prince. Let us leave Benares, riding together in one chariot. If you do not leave you will meet with disaster.” Then the wife of King Long Life Span and Prince Long Life left Benares, riding together in one chariot. At that time Prince Long Life had this thought, “Let me now rather go from village to village and town to town, to learn through hearing much.” Having had this thought, Prince Long Life went from village to village and town to town, learning through hearing much. Because of his wide learning he changed his name to Master Long Life. Master Long Life further thought, “What is to be learned I have now already attained. Let me return to the city of Benares, stop in the streets and alleys and, with a cheerful face, perform fine music. In this way the noble families of Benares, on hearing me, will be greatly delighted and entertained.” Having had this thought, Master Long Life went to the city of Benares, stopped in the streets and alleys and, with a cheerful face, performed fine music. In this way the noble families of Benares, on hearing him, were greatly delighted and entertained. Then the outer [circle] of the retainers of King Brahmadatta of Kāsi heard about him, the intermediate [circle] of retainers,... the inner [circle] of retainers, and the brahmin chaplain all heard about him in turn; and so too did King Brahmadatta of Kāsi, who summoned him to come and visit.^10

Master Long Life approached King Brahmadatta of Kāsi and, standing before him with a cheerful face, performed fine music. On hearing it, King Brahmadatta of Kāsi was greatly delighted and entertained. Then King Brahmadatta of Kāsi told him, “Master, from now on you can live in reliance on me; I shall provide for you.” Then Master Long Life went to live in reliance on King Brahmadatta of Kāsi, who provided for him. Later on [the king] gained trust in Master Long Life and, by means of assigning him one responsibility, he handed him the sword [signifying the office] of bodyguard. At that time King Brahmadatta of Kāsi ordered his charioteer, “Prepare the chariot, I wish to go out hunting.” On receiving this order, the charioteer promptly prepared the chariot. When it was ready, he returned and said, “The chariot is prepared and at Your Majesty’s disposal.” Then King Brahmadatta of Kāsi, together with Master Long Life, went out [of Benares], riding in the chariot. Master Long Life had this thought, “This King Brahmadatta of Kāsi is cruel and immoral. He captured my father, King Long Life Span of Kosala, an innocent man; he seized his country and the wealth in his storehouses; he brutally and unjustly had him killed and cut into seven pieces. Let me now drive the chariot in such a way that it becomes separated from the fourfold army, each being in a different place.” Having had this thought, Master Long Life steered the chariot so that it became separated from the fourfold army, each being in a different place. At this time King Brahmadatta of Kāsi, having encountered a muddy stretch of road and being oppressed by a hot wind, was feeling distressed and thirsty. Tired and wishing to lie down, he descended from the chariot and, using Master Long Life’s knee as a pillow, took a nap. Then Master Long Life again had this thought, “King Brahmadatta of Kāsi is cruel and immoral. He captured my father, an innocent man; he seized his country and the wealth in his storehouses; he brutally and unjustly had him killed and cut into seven pieces. Right now he is in my hands. I should just take revenge.” Having had this thought, Master Long Life took out his sharp knife, held it at the throat of King Brahmadatta of Kāsi, and said, “Now I will

kill you. Now I will kill you.” Then Master Long Life thought again, “For me to [kill him] would be wrong. Why is that? I recall how my father, long ago, when he was seated beneath the signpost, on the verge of death, told me, ‘Be patient, Prince! Be patient, Prince! Don’t let the bondage of resentment arise. Instead you should practice loving-kindness.’” Recalling this, [Master Long Life] withdrew the knife and put it back in its sheath. At that time King Brahmadatta of Kāsi was having a dream in which he saw this, “Prince Long Life, the son of King Long Life Span of Kosala, is holding a sharp knife at my throat, saying, ‘Now I will kill you. Now I will kill you.’” On seeing this he became very fearful and all the hairs on his body stood on end. He was so startled that he woke up. Arising, he said to Master Long Life, “You should know that in my dream I saw Prince Long Life, the son of King Long Life Span of Kosala, holding a sharp knife at my throat and saying, ‘Now I will kill you, now I will kill you.’” On hearing this, Master Long Life said, “Let your Majesty, not be afraid! Let your Majesty not be afraid! Why is that? That Prince Long Life, the son of King Long Life Span of Kosala, is myself.^11 Your Majesty, I had this thought: ‘King Brahmadatta of Kāsi is cruel and immoral. He captured my father, an innocent man; he seized his country and the wealth in his storehouses; he brutally and unjustly had him killed and cut into seven pieces. Right now he is in my hands. I should just take revenge.’ “Your Majesty, I took out my sharp knife, held it at your throat, and said, ‘Now I will kill you. Now I will kill you.’ Your Majesty, I thought again, ‘For me to [kill him] would be wrong. Why is that? I recall how my father, long ago, when he was seated beneath the signpost, on the verge of death, told me, “Be patient, Prince! Be patient, Prince! Don’t let the bondage of resentment arise. Instead you should practice loving-kind ness.”’ On recalling this, I withdrew the knife and put it back in its sheath.” King Brahmadatta of Kāsi said, “Prince, you said this, ‘Be patient, Prince! Be patient, Prince!’—I understand the meaning of this. [But,] Prince, you also said, ‘Don’t let the bondage of resentment arise. Instead you should practice loving-kindness’—what is the meaning of this?” Prince Long Life replied, “Your Majesty, ‘Don’t let the bondage of resentment arise. Instead you should practice loving-kindness’ means just this, [what I am doing right now].”

On hearing this, King Brahmadatta of Kāsi said, “Prince, as of now the entire country controlled by me is given to you, and your father’s orig- inal country is returned to you. Why is that? What you have done—namely, sparing my life—is extremely difficult to do.” On hearing this, Prince Long Life said, “Your Majesty’s original country belongs to Your Majesty. My father’s original country can be regarded as having been returned [to me].”^12 Then King Brahmadatta of Kāsi returned in the chariot together with Prince Long Life. He entered the city of Benares, sat in the main hall, and addressed his ministers, “Ministers, if you were to see Prince Long Life, the son of King Long Life Span of Kosala, what would you do?” On hearing this, some of the ministers said, “Your Majesty, if I were to see him I would cut off his hands.” Others said, “Your Majesty, if I were to see him I would cut off his feet.” Still others said, “I would kill him.” King Brahmadatta of Kāsi told his ministers, “Ministers, if you wish to see Prince Long Life, the son of King Long Life Span of Kosala, here he is. Do not give rise to any evil intention toward this prince! Why is that? What this prince has done—namely, sparing my life—is extremely difficult to do.” Then King Brahmadatta of Kāsi had Prince Long Life bathed royally, anointed with royal fragrances, dressed in royal garments, and seated on a golden throne. Then he gave his daughter to him in marriage and let him return to his own country. Monks, all those monarchs, anointed warrior kings, were rulers of great countries. In governing their countries they themselves practiced patience in the face of insult and also spoke in praise of patience; they themselves practiced loving-kindness and also spoke in praise of loving-kindness; they themselves practiced benevolence and also spoke in praise of benevolence. Monks, you too should be like that. Having left home out of faith and gone forth to practice the path, you should practice patience in the face of insult and also speak in praise of patience; yourselves practice loving- kindness and also speak in praise of loving-kindness; yourselves practice benevolence and also speak in praise of benevolence. At this, some of the monks [at Kosambī] who heard what the Buddha said gave this reply, “The World-honored One is the master of the Dharma [but]

let him now, for the time being, stop [intervening]. Those [of the other faction] are telling us what to do. Do we not [also] get to tell them what to do?”^13 Then the World-honored One was not pleased with the behavior of the monks of Kosambī, with their manners, with their training, or with their prac tice. He rose from his seat and spoke these verses: With a few spoken words They tear apart the most revered sangha. When the noble sangha is torn apart, No one can reprove and stop them. [The king of Kāsi] killed [the king of Kosala] by cutting up his body; Seized his elephants, cattle, horses, and property; Destroyed his country, wiped him out completely. [Yet,] as in ancient times, he achieved reconciliation. You, however, on account of a small verbal abuse, Are unable to exercise restraint and be in harmony. If you do not consider what is really significant, How can the bondage of resentment become appeased? With much verbal abuse, scolding, and blaming, One can [still] exercise restraint and be in harmony. If one considers what is really significant, The bondage of resentment can certainly be appeased. If one [tries] to end quarreling by quarreling, One will never see it end. Only through patience can one end quarreling. This principle should be honored. Becoming angry with a wise and true person, Speaking irresponsible words, Slandering a noble sage— One who does this is degraded and ignorant, [Thinking,] “Others do not understand what is significant; Only I alone am capable of knowing it!”

If, [however,] someone is able to understand what is significant, Then his anger will be appeased. If one finds a calm companion Who is wise and also practices what is wholesome, Each may let go of his earlier fixed ideas As they delight in constantly accommodating to each other. If one does not find a calm companion Who is wise and practices only what is wholesome, Then [instead of] being like a king who sternly governs his country,^14 Be like an elephant alone in the wilds. Practice alone, doing no evil, Like an elephant alone in the wilds. Practice alone, doing what is wholesome and excellent, Avoiding the company of those who are evil. [If while] training one does not find a wholesome friend, Someone who is one’s equal [in attitude], Then one should be firmly intent on dwelling alone, Avoiding the company of those who are evil. When the World-honored One had spoken these verses, he departed, trav- eling through the air by means of his supernormal power, and he arrived in the village of Bālakaloṇakāra.^15 At that time Venerable Bhagu, a son of the Sakyans, was in the village of Bālakaloṇakāra. Day and night he was not sleepy; he energetically practiced the path, dwelling with the aspiration to be continuously collected and established in the requisites of the path.^16 Venerable [Bhagu], a son of the Sakyans, saw the Buddha coming in the distance. On seeing him, [Bhagu] approached to receive him. He took the Buddha’s [outer] robe and bowl and set out a seat for the Buddha and water to wash his feet. The Buddha, having washed his feet, sat down on the seat [prepared] by Venerable Bhagu, a son of the Sakyans. Having sat down, he said, “Monk Bhagu, are you constantly at ease, lacking nothing?” Venerable Bhagu, son of the Sakyans, replied, “World-honored One, I am constantly at ease, lacking nothing.”

The World-honored One asked again, “Monk Bhagu, in what way are you at ease, lacking nothing?” Venerable Bhagu replied, “World-honored One, day and night I am not sleepy; I energetically practice the path, dwelling with the aspiration to be continuously collected and established in the requisites of the path. World honored One, in this way I am constantly at ease, lacking nothing.”^17 The World-honored One thought, “This clansman is dwelling at ease. Let me now teach him the Dharma.” Having had this thought, he taught the Dharma to Venerable Bhagu, exhorting and inspiring him, fully delighting him. Having taught him the Dharma with countless skillful means, having exhorted and inspired him, fully delighting him, [the Buddha] rose from his seat and left, heading for Rakkhitavana Grove.^18 Entering Rakkhitavana Grove, he went to the base of a tree, spread his sitting mat, and sat down cross-legged. The World-honored One further thought, “I have been able to get away from those Kosambī monks with their frequent disputes, their mutual antag onism, hatred, and anger, their quarrelling among themselves. I do not delight in recalling that region, the place where those Kosambī monks dwell.” Just at that time there was a single great elephant, the leader of a herd of elephants, who had left his herd and, wandering alone, had come to Rakkhi tavana Grove. Entering Rakkhitavana Grove, he went to an excellent sāla tree and stood leaning against that excellent sāla tree. Then the great elephant had this thought, “I have been able to get away from that herd of elephants—female elephants, male elephants, elephant calves big and small. That herd of elephants was always walking ahead of me, trampling the grass and muddying the water. At that time I had to eat trampled grass and drink muddied water. Now I can feed on fresh grass and clear water.” Then the World-honored One, by means of the knowledge of the minds of others, came to know the thoughts in the mind of that elephant. He spoke these verses: One elephant is like [other] elephants, With body complete and endowed with tusks. One’s mind too is like [other] minds, If one delights in dwelling alone in the forest.

Then the World-honored One took his robes and bowl and went from Rakkhita vana Grove to Pācīnavaṃsa Grove. At that time there were three clansmen living together in Pācīnavaṃsa Grove: Venerable Anuruddha, Ven- erable Nandiya, and Venerable Kimbila. Those venerable ones were practicing in this way.^19 Whichever of them came back first from begging for almsfood would set out the seats, draw water, and put out the utensils for washing the feet: the foot mat, the cloth for wiping the feet, the water pot, and the bathing bowl. If he was able to finish the food he had received, he would finish it, but if there were leftovers he would put them in a container and cover it. Having completed his meal, he would put away his bowl, wash his hands and feet, and, with his sitting mat over his shoulder, go into a hut to sit in meditation. Whichever of them came back last from begging for almsfood would eat all of the food if he was able to, and if it was not sufficient he would take from the food previously left over and eat until he had had enough. If there were still leftovers, he would empty them out on the bare ground or into water that contained no living beings. He would take the eating utensils and, having washed them clean and wiped them, would put them away to one side. He would gather and roll up the sitting mats and put away the utensils for washing the feet, collecting the foot mat, the cloth for wiping the feet, the water pot, and the bathing bowl. After having swept the dining hall and sprinkled it [with water], so that it was clean and free of refuse, he would put away his robe and bowl, wash his hands and feet and, with his sitting mat over his shoulder, go into a hut to sit in meditation.^20 In the afternoon, if the first of these venerable ones to rise from sitting in meditation saw that the water pot or the bathing bowl was empty of water, he would take it and go to fetch [water]. If he was able to, he would carry it back and place it to one side. If he was not able to [carry the full water pot], he would beckon with his hand to another monk, and the two would carry it together and place it to one side, without speaking to each other, without asking each other anything. Once in five days these venerable ones would assemble to discuss Dharma together or to maintain noble silence.

Then the park warden [of Pācīnavaṃsa Grove], who had seen the World- honored One coming in the distance, stopped him, saying, “Renunciant, renunciant, do not enter this park. Why is that? In this park there are three clansmen, Venerable Anuruddha, Venerable Nandiya, and Venerable Kimbila. If they were to see you they might disapprove.” The World-honored One said, “Park warden, if they were to see me they would certainly approve. They would not disapprove.”^21 Then Venerable Anuruddha, who had seen the World-honored One coming in the distance, reprimanded the park warden, saying, “Don’t refuse the World-honored One, park warden! Don’t stop the Well-gone One! Why is that? This is our venerable [teacher] who is coming; it is our Well-gone One who is coming.” Venerable Anuruddha came out to receive the World-honored One. He took the Buddha’s [outer] robe and bowl, Venerable Nandiya set out a seat for the Buddha, and Venerable Kimbila brought water for the Buddha. At that time the Buddha, having washed his hands and feet, sat down on the seat set out by that venerable one. Having sat down, he asked, “Anuruddha, are you constantly at ease, lacking nothing?” Venerable Anuruddha replied, “World-honored One, I am constantly at ease, lacking nothing.” The World-honored One asked, “Anuruddha, in what way are you con- stantly at ease, lacking nothing?” Venerable Anuruddha replied: World-honored One, I have this thought, “It is a great gain for me, it is a great benefit for me, that I am practicing together with such companions in the holy life.” World-honored One, toward these companions in the holy life I constantly practice bodily deeds of loving-kindness, both seen and unseen, equally and without distinction; I practice verbal deeds of loving-kindness and mental deeds of loving kindness, both seen and unseen, equally and without distinction. World-honored One, I have this thought, “Let me now forgo my own state of mind and follow the state of mind of these venerable friends.” Then, World-honored One, I forgo my own state of mind and follow the state of mind of these venerable friends. World-honored One, I never have

even one disapproving state of mind. World-honored One, it is in this way that I am constantly at ease, lacking nothing. [The Buddha] asked Venerable Nandiya [the same questions and received] similar answers. Then [the Buddha] also asked Venerable Kimbila, “Are you constantly at ease, lacking nothing?” Venerable Kimbila replied, “World-honored One, I am constantly at ease, lacking nothing.” [The Buddha] asked, “Kimbila, in what way are you constantly at ease, lacking nothing?” Venerable Kimbila replied: World-honored One, I have this thought, “It is a great gain for me, it is a great benefit for me, that I am practicing together with such companions in the holy life.” World-honored One, toward these companions in the holy life I constantly practice bodily deeds of loving-kindness, both seen and unseen, equally and without distinction; I practice verbal deeds of loving-kindness and mental deeds of loving kindness, both seen and unseen, equally and without distinction. World-honored One, I have this thought, “Let me now forgo my own state of mind and follow the state of mind of these venerable friends.” Then, World-honored One, I forgo my own state of mind and follow the state of mind of these venerable friends. World-honored One, I never have even one disapproving state of mind. World-honored One, it is in this way that I am constantly at ease, lacking nothing. The World-honored One praised them: It is well, it is well, Anuruddha! In this way you are constantly together in harmony, at ease and without contention, of a single mind, of a single teacher, blending [like] water and milk. Do you [also] attain a superhuman state, a distinction, a peaceful abiding in tranquility? Venerable Anuruddha replied: World-honored One, in this way being constantly together in harmony, at ease and without contention, of a single mind, of a single teacher, blending

[like] water and milk, we do attain a superhuman state, a state of distinction, a peaceful abiding in tranquility. World-honored One, we attain [inner] light and then a vision of forms; [but] that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappear again. The World-honored One said: Anuruddha, you have not penetrated that sign, namely the sign of attaining [inner] light and a vision of forms. So the vision of forms and the [inner] light soon disappear again. Formerly, Anuruddha, when I had not yet attained realization of the unsurpassable, right, and true awakening, I too attained [inner] light and a vision of forms; [but] that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disap peared again. Anuruddha, I had this thought, ‘What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, practicing diligently, without negligence, with the body tranquil and settled, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, without confusion, I attained samādhi and mental unification. Anuruddha, I had this thought, “Practicing diligently, without negli gence, with the body tranquil and settled, with right mindfulness and right comprehension, without confusion, I have attained samādhi and mental unification.” [I had this thought,] “What in this world does not exist,^22 could I see it or know it?” This doubt, this affliction, arose in my mind. Because of this affliction of doubt, my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with

a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and a vision of forms, but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of inattention arose. Because of this affliction of inattention, my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, and the affliction of inattention also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and a vision of forms, but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception arose.^23 Because of this affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception, my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.”

Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, the affliction of inattention shall not arise, and the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and a vision of forms, but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of sloth and-torpor arose. Because of this affliction of sloth-and-torpor, my concen tration fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, the affliction of inattention shall not arise, the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception shall not arise, and the affliction of sloth-and-torpor also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and a vision of forms, but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.”

Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of exces- sive energy arose. Because of this affliction of excessive energy my concen- tration fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, just as if a strong man were to catch a fly and grasp it too tightly, so that the fly will die, in the same way, Anuruddha, in my mind the affliction of excessive energy arose.^24 Because of this affliction of excessive energy my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, the affliction of inattention shall not arise, the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception shall not arise, the affliction of sloth-and-torpor shall not arise, and the affliction of exces- sive energy also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and a vision of forms, but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of lack of energy arose. Because of this affliction of lack of energy my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, just as if a strong man were to catch a fly and grasp it too loosely, so that the fly will fly away, in the same way, Anuruddha, in my

mind the affliction of lack of energy arose. Because of this affliction of lack of energy my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.’ Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, the affliction of inattention shall not arise, the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception shall not arise, the affliction of sloth-and-torpor shall not arise, the affliction of excessive energy shall not arise, and the affliction of lack of energy also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and a vision of forms, but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of fear arose. Because of this affliction of fear my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [expe rience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, it is just as if a man traveling along a road is approached from the four directions by evil thieves. Having seen them [approach], that man is afraid and terrified, and all the hairs on his body stand on end. In the same way, Anuruddha, the affliction of fear arose in my mind. Because of this affliction of fear my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.

Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, the affliction of inattention shall not arise, the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception shall not arise, the affliction of sloth-and-torpor shall not arise, the affliction of excessive energy shall not arise, the affliction of lack of energy shall not arise, and the affliction of fear also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and a vision of forms, but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of elation arose. Because of this affliction of elation my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, it is just as if a person who had originally been searching for one hidden treasure suddenly comes upon four hidden treasures.^25 Having seen [the treasures] he gives rise to elation. In the same way, Anu- ruddha, in my mind the affliction of elation arose. Because of this affliction of elation my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, the affliction of inattention shall not arise, the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception shall not arise, the affliction of sloth-and-torpor shall not arise, the affliction of excessive energy

shall not arise, the affliction of lack of energy shall not arise, the affliction of fear shall not arise, and the affliction of elation also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and a vision of forms, but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of conceit arose.^26 Because of this affliction of conceit my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, the affliction of inattention shall not arise, the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception shall not arise, the affliction of sloth-and-torpor shall not arise, the affliction of excessive energy shall not arise, the affliction of lack of energy shall not arise, the affliction of fear shall not arise, the affliction of elation shall not arise, and the affliction of conceit also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and vision of forms, but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye the [experience] of bright light and

the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of perception of diversity arose. Because of this affliction of perception of diversity my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; and with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, the affliction of inattention shall not arise, the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception shall not arise, the affliction of sloth-and-torpor shall not arise, the affliction of excessive energy shall not arise, the affliction of lack of energy shall not arise, the affliction of fear shall not arise, the affliction of elation shall not arise, the affliction of conceit shall not arise, and the affliction of perception of diversity also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and vision of forms; but that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “What affliction in my mind has caused my samādhi to fall away and the [inner] eye to cease? With the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of not contemplating forms arose.^27 Because of this affliction of not contem- plating forms my samādhi fell away and the [inner] eye ceased; with the ceasing of the [inner] eye, the [experience] of bright light and the vision of forms I had earlier attained, that vision of forms and [inner] light soon disappeared again.” Anuruddha, right then I necessarily had this thought, “In my mind the affliction of doubt shall not arise, the affliction of inattention shall not arise,

the affliction of bodily inertia [affecting] perception shall not arise, the affliction of sloth-and-torpor shall not arise, the affliction of excessive energy shall not arise, the affliction of lack of energy shall not arise, the affliction of fear shall not arise, the affliction of elation shall not arise, the affliction of conceit shall not arise, the affliction of perception of diversity shall not arise, and the affliction of not contemplating forms also shall not arise!” Anuruddha, because I aspired for the nonarising of this affliction, I went to stay in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently with a mind free of indolence. Through practicing diligently with a mind free of indolence while staying in a remote and solitary place, I attained [inner] light and a vision of forms. Anuruddha, if the affliction of doubt arose in my mind, then I purified my mind of it; if the affliction of inattention,... of bodily inertia [affecting] perception,... of sloth-and-torpor,... of excessive energy,... of lack of energy,... of fear,... of elation,... of conceit,... of perception of diversity,... of not contemplating forms arose in my mind, then I purified my mind of it. Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “I shall practice three [levels] of samādhi:^28 [I shall] practice samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation; [I shall] practice samādhi without [directed] awareness and only [sustained] contemplation; [I shall] practice samādhi without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation.” Then, Anuruddha, I practiced these three [levels] of samādhi: I practiced samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] con templation; I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and only [sustained] contemplation; and I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation. If I practiced samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, then my mind inclined toward samādhi without [directed] awareness and only [sustained] contemplation. In this way I was sure not to lose that knowledge and vision. In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I practiced samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation.

Anuruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tran- quility. If I practiced samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sus- tained] contemplation, then my mind inclined toward samādhi without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation. In this way I was sure not to lose that knowledge and vision. In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I practiced samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation. Anuruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tranquility. Anuruddha, if I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and only [sustained] contemplation, then my mind inclined toward con- centration with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation. In this way I was sure not to lose that knowledge and vision. In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and only [sustained] contemplation. Anu- ruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tranquility. If I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and only [sus- tained] contemplation, then my mind inclined toward samādhi without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation. In this way I was sure not to lose that knowledge and vision. In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and only [sustained] contemplation. Anu- ruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tranquility. If I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, then my mind inclined toward samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation. In this way I was sure not to lose that knowledge and vision. In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation. Anuruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tranquility. If I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, then my mind inclined toward samādhi without

[directed] awareness and only [sustained] contemplation. In this way I was sure not to lose that knowledge and vision. In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I practiced samādhi without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation. Anuruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tranquility. Anuruddha, at times I had knowledge of [inner] light but did not have a vision of forms. Anuruddha, I had this thought, “For what reason, due to what cause, do I have knowledge of [inner] light but do not have a vision of forms?” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “If I am aware of the sign of [inner] light [but] am not aware of the sign of forms, then at that time I have knowledge of [inner] light but do not have a vision of forms.” In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I had knowledge of [inner] light but did not have a vision of forms. Anuruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tranquility. Anuruddha, at times I had a vision of forms but did not have knowledge of [inner] light. Anuruddha, I had this thought, “For what reason, due to what cause, do I have a vision of forms but do not have knowledge of [inner] light?” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “If I am aware of the sign of form, then I am not aware of the sign of [inner] light. At that time I have [a vision] of forms but do not have knowledge of [inner] light.”^29 In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I had [a vision] of forms but did not have knowledge of [inner] light. Anuruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tranquility. Anuruddha, at times I had limited knowledge of [inner] light and limited vision of forms. Anuruddha, I had the thought, “For what reason, due to what cause, do I have limited knowledge of [inner] light and limited vision of forms?” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “If I enter limited samādhi, then because of having entered limited samādhi the [inner] eye has

limited purity. Because the [inner] eye has limited purity, I have limited knowledge of [inner] light and limited vision of forms.” In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I had limited knowledge of [inner] light and limited vision of forms. Anuruddha, at that time I under- took this practice of dwelling in tranquility. Anuruddha, at times I had vast knowledge of [inner] light and vast vision of forms. Anuruddha, I had this thought, “For what reason, due to what cause, do I have vast knowledge of [inner] light and vast vision of forms?” Anuruddha, I further had this thought, “If I enter vast samādhi, then because of having entered vast samādhi the [inner] eye has vast purity. Because the [inner] eye has vast purity, I have vast knowledge of [inner] light and vast vision of forms.” In this way, Anuruddha, having known it to be thus, for a whole day, for a whole night, for a whole day and night, I had vast knowledge of [inner] light and vast vision of forms. Anuruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tranquility. Anuruddha, if the affliction of doubt arose in my mind, then I purified my mind of it; if the affliction of inattention,... of bodily inertia [affecting] perception,... of sloth-and-torpor,... of excessive energy,... of lack of energy,... of fear,... of elation,... of conceit,... of perception of diversity,... of not contemplating forms arose in my mind, then I purified my mind of it. When practicing samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, I practiced it fully. When practicing samādhi without [directed] awareness and only [sustained] contemplation, I practiced it fully. When practicing samādhi without [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation, I practiced it fully. When practicing exclusive samādhi, I practiced it fully. When practicing diversified samādhi, I practiced it fully. When practicing limited samādhi, I practiced it fully. When practicing vast and immeas- urable samādhi, I practiced it fully.^30 I aroused knowledge and vision that were fully clear and pure, and I progressed toward established samādhi. Energetically cultivating

the requisites of the path, I came to know as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done. There will not be another experiencing of existence.” Anuruddha, at that time I undertook this practice of dwelling in tranquility. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Anuruddha, Venerable Nandiya, and Venerable Kimbila were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma72-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA24.8]], [[MA185]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DN22]], [[EA27.1]], [[MA31]], [[EA12.1]], [[MA98]], [[MN10]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA73]], [[MN127]], [[MN31]], [[MN48]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA72]]
> ◄  [[ma71-bdk]] 📜  [[ma73-bdk]] ►
