---
sutta_code: "MA74"
sutta_title:
  - "Cūḷasāropama Sutta "
  - "Shorter Simile of the Heartwood"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA74]]
> ◄  [[ma73-bdk]] 📜  [[ma75-bdk]] ►

### 74. The Discourse on Eight Thoughts

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling in the Deer Park in Bhesakaḷa Forest on Suṃsumāra Mountain in Bhagga country. At that time, Venerable Anuruddha was dwelling in Sandbank Forest in the Ceti country. At that time Venerable Anuruddha was seated in meditation in a quiet place, reflecting. He had these [seven] thoughts in his mind:

The path is attained through having no desires, not through having desires. The path is attained through contentment, not through dissatisfaction. The path is attained through seclusion, not through rejoicing in company, dwelling in company, being together with [others in] company. The path is attained through effort, not through indolence. The path is attained through right mindfulness, not through wrong mindfulness. The path is attained through a collected mind, not through a distracted mind. The path is attained through wisdom, not through delusion. Then, through the [supernormal] knowledge of the minds of others the World-honored One came to know the thoughts, reflections, and activities in the mind of Venerable Anuruddha. Having come to know this, the World- honored One entered an appropriate state of samādhi. Through this appropriate state of samādhi, just as [swiftly and easily] as a strong man could bend and stretch out his arm, in the same way the World-honored One disappeared from the Deer Park in Bhesakaḷa Forest on Suṃsumāra Mountain in Bhagga country and appeared before Venerable Anuruddha in Sandbank Forest in Ceti country.

Then the World-honored One emerged from [the state of] samādhi and praised Venerable Anuruddha:

It is well, it is well, Anuruddha that, while seated in meditation in a quiet place, reflecting, you had these [seven] thoughts: “The path is attained through having no desires, not through having desires. The path is attained through contentment, not through dissatisfaction. The path is attained through seclusion, not through rejoicing in company, dwelling in company, being together with [others in] company. The path is attained through effort, not through indolence. The path is attained through right mindful ness, not through wrong mindfulness. The path is attained through a con centrated mind, not through a distracted mind. The path is attained through wisdom, not through delusion.” Anuruddha, you shall receive from the Tathāgata an eighth thought of a great person. Having received it, reflect on it! “The path is attained through absence of proliferation, delighting in absence of proliferation, and practicing absence of proliferation; not through proliferation, not through delighting in proliferation, not through practicing proliferation.” Anuruddha, if you become accomplished in these eight thoughts of a great person, you will certainly be able to attain [the four absorptions]: “Secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states,... up to... dwell having attained the fourth absorption.” Anuruddha, if you become accomplished in the eight thoughts of a great person and also attain these four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present, attaining them easily and without difficulty, then this will be for you like being a king or a royal minister who has a fine chest full of various types of clothes: whatever he desires to wear in the morning, he takes and puts on; whatever clothes he desires to wear at noon or in the afternoon he takes and puts on, freely according to his wish. Anuruddha, you will be like this, in that the rag robes you receive will be for you the best of garments and your mind will be without desires as you practice this, established in the practice of tranquility. Anuruddha, if you become accomplished in the eight thoughts of a great person and also attain these four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present, attaining them easily and without difficulty, then this will be

for you like being a king or a royal minister who has a good chief cook [who prepares] various types of pure, fine, and delectable dishes and meals. Anuruddha, you will be like this, in that the almsfood for which you regularly beg will be for you the best of meals and your mind will be with- out desires, as you practice this, established in the practice of tranquility. Anuruddha, if you become accomplished in the eight thoughts of a great person and also attain these four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present, attaining them easily and without difficulty, then this will be for you like being a king or a royal minister who has a fine house or a multistoried palace. Anuruddha, you will be like this, in that the tree beneath which you stay will be for you the best of houses and your mind will be without desires, as you practice this, established in the practice of tranquility. Anuruddha, if you become accomplished in the eight thoughts of a great person and also attain these four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present, attaining them easily and without difficulty, then this will be for you like being a king or a royal minister who has fine couches and seats, upholstered with woolen textiles, draped with brocades and fine silk fabric, with lined and quilted coverlets, and with cushions [made of] antelope hide at both ends. Anuruddha, you will be like this, in that a seat of grass or a seat of leaves will be for you the best of seats and your mind will be without desires, as you practice this, established in the practice of tranquility. Anuruddha, if you become accomplished in the eight thoughts of a great person and also attain these four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present, attaining them easily and without difficulty, then, if you wander like this in the eastern direction, you will certainly be at ease, free of affliction by the multitude of sufferings. If you wander in the southern direction,... the western direction,... the northern direction you will certainly be at ease, free of affliction by the multitude of sufferings.^37 Anuruddha, if you become accomplished in the eight thoughts of a great person and also attain these four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present, attaining them easily and without difficulty, then I do not say that you will [merely] maintain wholesome states, let alone do I say

that you will regress; rather you will, by day and by night, increase in wholesome states and not regress. Anuruddha, if you become accomplished in the eight thoughts of a great person and also attain these four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present, attaining them easily and without difficulty, then you will cer tainly attain one of two fruits: either you will attain final knowledge here and now or, if there is a remainder [of clinging], you will attain nonreturning. Anuruddha, you should become accomplished in these eight thoughts of a great person and you should attain these four higher states of mind, happy abidings in the present, attaining them easily and without difficulty. After that, spend the rains retreat in this Sandbank Forest in Ceti country. Then the World-honored One taught the Dharma to Venerable Anuruddha, exhorting and inspiring him, fully delighting him. Having with countless skillful means taught Anuruddha the Dharma, having exhorted and inspired him, fully delighting him, [the Buddha] entered an appropriate state of con centration. Through this appropriate state of samādhi, just as [easily and swiftly as] a strong man could bend and stretch out his arm, the World honored One disappeared from Sandbank Forest in Ceti country and appeared in the Deer Park in Bhesakaḷa Forest on Suṃsumāra Mountain in Bhagga country. Then Venerable Ānanda, holding a flywhisk, attended the Buddha. Then the World-honored, having emerged from being in [a state of] samādhi, looked around and said, “Ānanda, whatever monks are in the vicinity of the Deer Park in Bhesakaḷa Forest on Suṃsumāra Mountain, have them all gather in the assembly hall. When they are gathered in the assembly hall, come back and tell me.” Having received this instruction from the Buddha, Venerable Ānanda paid homage at [the Buddha’s] feet and went to announce the order that all monks in the vicinity of the Deer Park in Bhesakaḷa Forest on Suṃsumāra Mountain should all gather in the assembly hall. When they were gathered in the assem bly hall, he went back to the Buddha, paid homage at his feet and, standing back to one side, said, “World-honored One, all the monks in the vicinity of the Deer Park in Bhesakaḷa Forest on Suṃsumāra Mountain are all now gath ered in the assembly hall. May the World-honored One himself know the proper time.”

Then the World-honored One went to the assembly hall, accompanied by Venerable Ānanda. He spread his sitting mat in front of the assembly of monks and sat down. Having sat down, he said,^38 “Monks, I will now teach you the eight thoughts of a great person. Listen closely and pay proper attention!” Then the monks listened to receive the teaching. The Buddha said: The eight thoughts of a great person are these: “The path is attained through having no desires, not through having desires. The path is attained through contentment, not through dissatisfaction. The path is attained through seclusion, not through rejoicing in company, dwelling in company, being together with [others in] company. The path is attained through effort, not through indolence. The path is attained through right mindfulness, not through wrong mindfulness. The path is attained through a collected mind, not through a distracted mind. The path is attained through wisdom, not through delusion. The path is attained through absence of proliferation, delighting in absence of proliferation, and practicing absence of prolifer- ation, not through proliferation, not through delighting in proliferation, not through practicing proliferation.” How is the path attained through having no desires, not through having desires? This means that when a monk has attained absence of desires, he himself knows that he has attained absence of desires but he does not let others know, “I am without desires.” When he has attained contentment,... has attained effort,... has attained right mindfulness,... has attained right samādhi,... has attained wisdom,... and has attained absence of proliferation, he himself knows that he has attained absence of proliferation and desires but he does not desire to let others know, “I have attained the absence of [proliferation and] desires.” This is how the path is attained through having no desires, not through having desires. How is the path attained through contentment, not through dissatis- faction? This means that a monk practices contentment by taking robes [only] to cover his physical frame and taking [only enough] food to fulfill [the needs] of the body.^39 This is how the path is attained through con- tentment, not through dissatisfaction. How is the path attained through seclusion, not through rejoicing in company, dwelling in company, being together with [others in] company?

This means that a monk practices seclusion by accomplishing the twofold seclusion, bodily and mental seclusion.^40 This is how the path is attained through seclusion, not through rejoicing in company, dwelling in company, being together with [others in] company. How is the path attained through effort, not through indolence? This means that a monk constantly practices with effort to abandon evil and unwholesome [states] and develop wholesome states, persistently arousing his mind, singlemindedly and steadfastly, without abandoning the task, for the sake of [developing] the roots of wholesomeness. This is how the path is attained through effort, not through indolence. How is the path attained through right mindfulness, not through wrong mindfulness? This means that a monk contemplates the body as a body internally, contemplates feelings,... states of mind,... and dharmas as dharmas internally.^41 This is how the path is attained through right mind fulness, not through wrong mindfulness. How is the path attained through a collected mind, not through a distracted mind? This means that a monk dwells secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states,... up to... dwells having attained the fourth absorption. This is how the path is attained through a collected mind, not through a distracted mind. How is the path attained through wisdom, not through delusion? This means that a monk dwells in developing wisdom, contemplating the rise and fall of dharmas, attaining knowledge like this, noble wisdom that is brightly penetrating, discriminative understanding, for the true cessation of dukkha. This is how the path is attained through wisdom, not through delusion. How is the path attained through absence of proliferation, delighting in absence of proliferation, and practicing absence of proliferation, not through proliferation, not through delighting in proliferation, not through practicing proliferation? This means that a monk’s mind constantly extin guishes proliferation and enjoys abiding in nirvana without remainder.^42 His mind continuously delights in this abiding, rejoicing in mental freedom. This is how the path is attained through absence of proliferation, delighting in absence of proliferation, and practicing absence of proliferation, not through proliferation, not through delighting in proliferation, not through practicing proliferation.

Monks, the monk Anuruddha is already accomplished in these eight thoughts of a great person. Later he will spend the rains retreat in Sandbank Forest in Ceti country, having received this teaching from me. [Anuruddha] stayed in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently, with a mind free of indolence. Having stayed in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently, with a mind free of indolence, [Anuruddha] completed the supreme holy life, for the sake of which clansmen shave off hair and beard, don the yellow robe, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path and fully attain the summit of the holy life. In this very life, he per- sonally attained understanding and awakening, and dwelled having personally realized it. He knew as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done. There will not be another experiencing of existence.” Then Venerable Anuruddha became an arahant, his mind was rightly lib- erated, and he became a supreme elder. At that time he spoke these verses:

Knowing from afar my reflections, The Supreme Teacher of the world, With his body upright, his mind entered samādhi, Traversing space, he immediately arrived.^43 He taught me regarding the [seven] thoughts in my mind And then added a further one: That all buddhas delight in absence of proliferation, Being far removed from any proliferation. Having come to know the Dharma from him, Being happily established in the true Dharma, I attained samādhi and penetrative wisdom: “What was to be done in the Buddha’s teaching has been done.”^44 I do not delight in death And I do not wish for rebirth. In accordance with the proper time, Established in right mindfulness and right comprehension,

In a bamboo grove at Vesālī My life will come to an end. Beneath the bamboos of that grove I shall attain final nirvana without remainder. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Anuruddha and the [other] monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma74-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA42.6]] | M i 198 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN4.28]], [[AN8.53]], [[SN48.10]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA74]]
> ◄  [[ma73-bdk]] 📜  [[ma75-bdk]] ►
