---
sutta_code: "MA76"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahāgosiṅga Sutta "
  - "Discourse at Gosiṅga Longer"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA76]]
> ◄  [[ma75-bdk]] 📜  [[ma77-bdk]] ►

### 76. The Discourse at Ukkācelā

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Ukkācelā, on the bank of a pond by the Ganges River. At that time, in the afternoon a certain monk rose from sitting in meditation, approached the Buddha, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, and stepped back to sit to one side. He said: May the World-honored One well teach me the Dharma in brief. Having heard the Dharma from the World-honored One, I will stay in a remote and solitary place and practice diligently, with a mind free of indolence. Through staying in a remote and solitary place and practicing diligently, with a mind free of indolence, may I accomplish the holy life, for the sake of which clansmen shave off hair and beards, don yellow robes, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path and attain fully the summit of the holy life. May I, in this very life, personally attain under- standing and awakening, and dwell having personally realized it. May I know as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been estab- lished, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another expe- riencing of existence.” The World-honored One said:^55 Monk, you should train in such a way that the mind becomes settled, remaining imperturbable within, developing immeasurable wholesome factors. Again, contemplate the body as a body internally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension estab- lished, taming your own mind well, so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Again, contemplate the body as a body externally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that cov- etousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Again, con- template the body as a body internally and externally, dwelling with utmost

diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection.^56 Monk, such samādhi should be well developed when going and coming. You should develop it when standing, when sitting, when lying down, when going to sleep, when waking up, and when both sleeping and waking up. Again, you should develop samādhi with [directed] aware- ness and [sustained] contemplation,... samādhi without [directed] awareness but with only [sustained] contemplation;... you should well develop samādhi without [directed] awareness and without [sustained] contemplation; and you should well develop samādhi conjoined with rapture,... samādhi conjoined with happiness,... samādhi conjoined with being collected,^57 and you should well develop con- centration conjoined with equanimity.^58 Monk, when you have developed this samādhi, when you have developed it extremely well, then, monk, you should further contemplate feelings as feelings internally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Again, contemplate feelings as feelings externally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Again, contemplate feelings as feelings internally and externally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Monk, such samādhi should be developed well when going and coming. You should develop it when standing, sitting, lying down, going to sleep, waking up, and when both sleeping and waking up. Again, you should develop samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contem- plation,... samādhi without [directed] awareness but with only [sus- tained] contemplation;... you should well develop samādhi without [directed] awareness and without [sustained] contemplation; and you should well develop samādhi conjoined with rapture,... samādhi conjoined

with happiness,... samādhi conjoined with being collected; and you should well develop samādhi conjoined with equanimity. Monk, when you have developed this samādhi, when you have developed it extremely well, then, monk you should further contemplate mental states as mental states internally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Again, you should contemplate mental states as mental states externally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that cov etousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Again, you should contemplate mental states as mental states internally and externally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right com prehension established, taming your own mind well so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Monk, such samādhi should be well developed when going and coming. You should develop it when standing, sitting, lying down, going to sleep, waking up, and both when sleeping and waking up. Again, you should develop samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation,... samādhi without [directed] awareness but with only [sustained] contemplation;... you should well develop samādhi without [directed] awareness and without [sustained] contemplation; and you should well develop samādhi conjoined with rapture,... con centration conjoined with happiness,... samādhi conjoined with being collected, and you should well develop samādhi conjoined with equanimity. Monk, when you have developed this samādhi, when you have developed it extremely well, then, monk you should further contemplate dharmas as dharmas internally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Again, you should contemplate dharmas as dharmas externally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Again, you should contemplate dharmas

as dharmas internally and externally, dwelling with utmost diligence, with right mindfulness and right comprehension established, taming your own mind well so that covetousness is left behind and the mind is without dejection. Monk, such samādhi should be well developed when going and coming. You should develop it when standing, sitting, lying down, going to sleep, waking up, and both when sleeping and waking up. Again, you should develop samādhi with [directed] awareness and [sustained] contemplation,... samādhi without [directed] awareness but with only [sustained] contemplation;... you should well develop samādhi without [directed] awareness and without [sustained] contemplation; and you should well develop samādhi conjoined with rapture,... con- centration conjoined with happiness,... samādhi conjoined with being [fully] collected, and you should well develop samādhi conjoined with equanimity. Monk, when you have developed this samādhi, when you have developed it extremely well, monk, you should dwell pervading one direc- tion with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, third, and fourth directions, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With a mind imbued with loving-kind- ness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill-will or contention, you should dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind] that is boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well-cultivated. In the same way, you should imbue your mind with compassion,... with empathetic joy,... and with equanimity, free from fetters or resentment, without ill-will or contention; you should dwell pervading the entire world [with a mind] that is boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well-cultivated. Monk, when you have developed this samādhi, developed it extremely well, if you wander in the eastern direction, you will certainly be at ease, free from numerous sufferings and afflictions. If you wander in the southern direction,... the western direction,... [or] the northern direction you will certainly be at ease, free from numerous sufferings and afflictions.^59 Monk, when you have developed this samādhi, developed it extremely well, then, I do not say that you will [only] maintain wholesome

states, much less that you will regress; rather [I say] that you will, by day and night, increase in these wholesome states without regression. Monk, when you have developed this samādhi, developed it extremely well, then you will certainly attain one of two fruits: either you will attain final knowledge in this life or, [if] there is a remainder [of cling- ing], you will attain nonreturning.^60 Thereupon that monk, having heard what the Buddha said, having received it well and retained it well, rose from his seat, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. Bearing in mind the instructions from the Buddha, he stayed in a remote and solitary place and practiced diligently, with a mind free of indolence. Through staying in a remote and solitary place, practicing diligently, with a mind free of indolence, he accomplished the holy life, for the sake of which clansmen shave off their hair and beards, don yellow robes, leave home out of faith, and go forth to practice the path and attain fully the summit of the holy life. In this very life he personally attained understanding and awakening and dwelled having personally realized it. He knew as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” That venerable one, having understood the Dharma, became an arahant. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma76-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M i 212 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN8.53]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA76]]
> ◄  [[ma75-bdk]] 📜  [[ma77-bdk]] ►
