---
sutta_code: "MA78"
sutta_title:
  - "Cūḷagopālaka Sutta "
  - "Shorter Discourse on the Cowherd"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA78]]
> ◄  [[ma77-bdk]] 📜  [[ma79-bdk]] ►

### 78. The Discourse on Brahmā’s Invitation to the Buddha

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, staying in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time there was a certain Brahmā dwelling in the Brahmā world who had given rise to this wrong view: “This realm is permanent, this realm is everlasting, this realm endures forever, this realm is the essence, this realm is of an unending nature. This realm is release; there is no other release superior to this release. This is the supreme, the sublime, the ultimate.”

Then, the World-honored One, who with his knowledge of the minds of others had come to know the thoughts in the mind of that Brahmā, entered an appropriate state of samādhi. Through this appropriate state of con centration, just as [easily and swiftly] as a strong man could bend and stretch out his arm, he disappeared from Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park in Sāvatthī, and appeared in the Brahmā world. At that time, on seeing the World-honored One arrive, that Brahmā invited the World-honored One: Welcome, Great Seer! This realm is permanent, this realm is everlasting, this realm endures forever, this realm is the essence, this realm is of an unending nature. This realm is release; there is no other release superior to this release. This is the supreme, the sublime, the ultimate. Then the World-honored One said: Brahmā, you praise as permanent what is impermanent; you praise as everlasting what is not everlasting; you praise as enduring what is not enduring; you praise as the essence what is not the essence; you praise as having an unending nature what is of a nature to end. You praise as release what is not release, [claiming] that there is no other release superior to this release, that this is the supreme, the sublime, the ultimate. Brahmā, this is ignorance on your part. Brahmā, this is ignorance on your part. At that time, Māra, the Evil One was among that assembly.^66 Then Māra, the Evil One, said to the World-honored One: Monk, do not contradict what this Brahmā says! Do not oppose what this Brahmā says! Monk, if you contradict what this Brahmā says, if you oppose what this Brahmā says, then, monk, it will be just as if someone were to bring you something auspicious but you were to reject it. What you say, monk, is just like that. Therefore, monk, I tell you, “Do not contradict what this Brahmā says! Do not oppose what this Brahmā says!” Monk, if you contradict what this Brahmā says, if you oppose what this Brahmā says, then, monk, you will be just like a man who is falling from a mountaintop and grabs at empty space with his hands and feet but finds nothing to hold on to. What you say, monk, is just like that.

Therefore, monk, I tell you, “Do not contradict what this Brahmā says! Do not oppose what this Brahmā says!” Monk, if you contradict what this Brahmā says, if you oppose what this Brahmā says, then, monk, you will be just like a man who is falling from a treetop and grabs at twigs and leaves with his hands and feet but finds nothing to hold on to. What you say, monk, is just like that. Therefore, monk, I tell you, “Do not contradict what this Brahmā says! Do not oppose what this Brahmā says!” Why is that? This is the Brahmā of Brahmās, the fortunate one, who is capable of magical transformations. He is the most venerable one, capable of making, capable of creating. He is the father [of all sentient beings]; whatever sentient beings have arisen or will arise, all of them arise from him. He knows all that is to be known; he sees all that is to be seen. Great Seer, if a renunciant or brahmin detests the earth [element] and disparages earth, then on the breaking up of the body at death he will certainly be reborn among the lowliest nymphs. It is the same for [the elements of] water,... fire,... [and] wind,... for spirits... _deva_ s... Pajāpati,... if he detests Brahmā and disparages Brahmā, then on the breaking up of the body at death he will certainly be reborn among the lowliest nymphs. [On the other hand,] Great Seer, if a renunciant or brahmin delights in the earth [element] and praises earth, then on the breaking up of the body at death he will certainly be reborn among the highest and most venerated Brahmās. It is the same for [the elements of] water,... fire,... [and] wind,... for spirits... _deva_ s... Pajāpati,... if he delights in Brahmā and praises Brahmā, then on the breaking up of the body at death he will certainly be reborn among the highest and most venerated Brahmās. Great Seer, do you not see this great assembly of Brahmā’s retinue, seated here on the same level as me? That Māra, the Evil One, though not a Brahmā or one of Brahmā’s retinue, claimed of himself, “I am a Brahmā.” At that time, the World-honored One had this thought, “This Māra, the Evil One, though he is not a Brahmā or one of Brahmā’s retinue, claims of himself, ‘I am a Brahmā.’ If ever there was one called Māra, the Evil One, then it is just this Māra, the Evil One.”

Having understood this, the World-honored One said: Māra, Evil One, you are not Brahmā nor are you one of Brahmā’s retinue, yet you claim of yourself, “I am a Brahmā.” If ever there was one called Māra, the Evil One, then you are just this Māra, the Evil One. Then Māra, the Evil One, thought, “The World-honored One knows me; the Well-gone One sees me.” Knowing this, he became despondent and promptly disappeared right there.^67 Then that Brahmā [again] invited the World-honored One up to three times: Welcome, Great Seer. This realm is permanent, this realm is everlasting, this realm endures forever, this realm is the essence, this realm is of an unending nature. This realm is release; there is no other release superior to this release. This is the supreme, the sublime, the ultimate. The World-honored One also said up to three times: Brahmā, you praise as permanent what is impermanent; you praise as everlasting what is not everlasting; you praise as enduring what is not enduring; you praise as the essence what is not the essence; you praise as having an unending nature what is of a nature to end. You praise as release what is not release, [claiming] that there is no other release superior to this release, that this is the supreme, the sublime, the ultimate. Brahmā, this is ignorance on your part. Brahmā, this is ignorance on your part. Then the Brahmā said to the World-honored One: Great Seer, formerly there were renunciants and brahmins of exceedingly long life spans who remained living for an extremely long time. Great Seer, your life span is extremely short, less than the duration of a single sitting in seclusion of those renunciants and brahmins. Why is that? They knew all that is to be known, they saw all that is to be seen. If there really is a release, then there is no other release superior to this release, for this is the supreme, the sublime, the ultimate. And if there really is no release, then there is no other release superior to this release, for this is the supreme, the sublime, the ultimate. Great Seer, you perceive what is release as not being release; you perceive what is not

release as being release. In this way you will not attain release; [instead] it will become a great delusion [for you]. Why is that? Because this is beyond your limits. Great Seer, if a renunciant or brahmin delights in earth and praises earth, then he is under my dominion; he must follow my wishes, must follow my orders. In the same way for water,... fire,.. .wind,... spirits,... _deva_ s,... Pajāpati,... if he delights in Brahmā, praises Brahmā, then he is under my dominion; he must follow my wishes, must follow my orders. Great Seer, if you delight in earth and praise earth, then you too are under my dominion; you must follow my wishes, must follow my orders. In the same way for water... fire... wind,... spirits,... _deva_ s,... Pajā- pati,... if you delight in Brahmā and praise Brahmā, then you too are under my dominion; you must follow my wishes, must follow my orders.

At this the World-honored One said:

It is so, Brahmā; what Brahmā has spoken is the truth. If a renunciant or brahmin delights in the earth [element] and praises the earth, then he is under your dominion; he must follow your wishes and follow your orders. In the same way for water,... fire,... wind,... spirits,... _deva_ s,... Pajāpati,... if he delights in Brahmā and praises Brahmā, then he is under your dominion; he must follow your wishes and follow your orders. Brahmā, if I were to delight in the earth [element] and praise the earth, then I too would be under your dominion; I would have to follow your wishes and follow your orders. In the same way for water,... fire,... wind,... spirits,... _deva_ s,... Pajāpati,... if I were to delight in Brahmā and praise Brahmā, then I too would be under your dominion; I would have to follow your wishes and follow your orders. Brahmā, as to these eight objects, [the four elements and four classes of divine beings,] if I were to follow these objects, to delight in them and praise them, then it would be the way [you have described]. [However,] Brahmā, I know where you have come from and where you are going, according to where you dwelled, according to where your life ended, and according to where you were reborn. [I know that] if one exists as a Brahmā one has great supernormal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great divine might.

At this the Brahmā said to the World-honored One: Great Seer, how do you know what I know and see what I see? How do you completely cognize my dominion, which is like the sun, brightly illu minating all directions in these thousand worlds? Have you [too] gained dominion within these thousand worlds? In knowing those various spheres where there is no day and night, have you, Great Seer, passed through them? Have you often passed through them? The World-honored One replied: Brahmā, your dominion is like the sun, brightly illuminating all directions in the thousand worlds. Within these thousand worlds, I [too] have attained dominion and I also know those various spheres where there is no day and night. Brahmā, I have passed through them. I have often passed through them. Brahmā, there are three [further] classes of deva s: the deva s of radiance, the deva s of pure radiance, and the deva s of pervasive pure radiance.^68 Brahmā, whatever knowledge and vision those three classes of deva s pos sess, I too possess that knowledge and vision. Brahmā, whatever knowledge and vision these three classes of deva s do not possess, I myself possess that knowledge and vision. Brahmā, whatever knowledge and vision those three classes of deva s and their retinues possess, I too possess that knowl edge and vision. Brahmā, whatever knowledge and vision these three classes of deva s and their retinues do not possess, I myself possess that knowledge and vision. Brahmā, whatever knowledge and vision you possess, I too possess this knowledge and vision. Brahmā, whatever knowledge and vision you do not possess, I myself possess that knowledge and vision. Brahmā, whatever knowledge and vision you and your retinue possess, I too possess this knowledge and vision. Brahmā, whatever knowledge and vision you and your retinue do not possess, I possess this knowledge and vision. Brahmā, you are not at all equal to me; you are not in any way equal to me. Rather, I am superior to you; I am greater than you. Then the Brahmā said to the World-honored One:

Great Seer, how is it that whatever knowledge and vision those three classes of _deva_ s possess, you too possess that knowledge and vision; what- ever knowledge and vision those three classes of _deva_ s do not possess, you yourself possess that knowledge and vision; whatever knowledge and vision those three classes of _deva_ s and their retinues possess, you too pos- sess that knowledge and vision; and whatever knowledge and vision those three classes of _deva_ s and their retinues do not possess, you yourself possess that knowledge and vision? [How is it that] whatever knowledge and vision I possess, you too pos- sess this knowledge and vision; whatever knowledge and vision I do not posses, you yourself possess that knowledge and vision; whatever knowl- edge and vision I and my retinue possess, you too possess that knowledge and vision; and whatever knowledge and vision I and my retinue do not possess, you yourself possess that knowledge and vision? Great Seer, are you not saying this out of desire? On being cross-ques- tioned you will not know [how to reply] and become ever more confused. Why is that? Because I am conscious of immeasurable worlds, I have immeasurable knowledge, immeasurable vision, immeasurable discrimi- nation, and I know each and every thing distinctly. This earth I know to be earth,... water,... fire,... wind,... spirits,... _deva_ s,... Pajāpati,... this Brahmā I know to be Brahmā.”

At this the World-honored One said:

Brahmā, if there is a renunciant or brahmin who in regard to the earth [ele- ment] has a perception of the earth as “the earth is me,” “ the earth is mine,” “I belong to the earth,” then, since he reckons the earth as self, he does not [truly] know the earth [element]. In the same way for water,... fire,... wind,... spirits,... _deva_ s,... Pajāpati,... Brahmā,... [the _deva_ s of] nonvexation,... [the _deva_ s of] nonaffliction,... if in regard to purity he has a perception of purity as “purity is me,” “purity is mine,” “I belong to purity,” then, since he reckons purity as self, he does not [truly] know purity. Brahmā, if there is a renunciant or brahmin who in regard to the earth [element] knows the earth as “the earth is not me,” “the earth is not mine,” “I do not belong to the earth,” then, since he does not reckon the earth as

self, he [truly] knows the earth [element]. In the same way for water,... fire,... wind,... spirits,... deva s,... Pajāpati,... Brahmā,... [the deva s of] nonvexation,... [the deva s of] nonaffliction,... in regard to purity he knows purity as “purity is not me,” “purity is not mine,” “I do not belong to purity,” then, since he does not reckon purity as self, he [truly] knows purity. Brahmā, in regard to the earth [element] I know the earth as “the earth is not me,” “ the earth is not mine,” “I do not belong to the earth.” Since I do not reckon the earth as self, I [truly] know the earth [element]. In the same way for water,... fire,... wind,... spirits,... deva s,... Pajā pati,... Brahmā,... [the deva s of] nonvexation,... [the deva s of] non affliction.... In regard to purity I know purity as “purity is not me,” “purity is not mine,” “I do not belong to purity.” Since I do not reckon purity as self, I [truly] know purity.^69 Then Brahmā said to the World-honored One: Great Seer, these living beings desire becoming, delight in becoming, are accustomed to becoming. [Yet] you have already uprooted the foundation of becoming. Why is that? [Because] you are reckoned to be a tathāgata, free from attachment, fully awakened. Then [the Buddha] spoke this stanza:^70 Seeing fear in becoming And seeing no dread in nonbecoming, Therefore do not delight in becoming! Why should becoming not be abandoned? [The Brahmā said,] “Great Seer, I now wish to make myself disappear.” The World-honored One said, “Brahmā, if you wish to make yourself dis appear, then do as you wish.” Then, wherever Brahmā tried to make himself disappear, the World-hon ored One immediately knew, “Brahmā, you are over there. You are here. You are in between.” Then the Brahmā did all he could to manifest his supernormal power. He wished to make himself disappear but was unable to disappear. He returned,

remaining within the Brahmā realm. Then the World-honored One said, “Brahmā, now I too wish to make myself disappear.” Then Brahmā said to the World-honored One, “Great Seer, if you wish to make yourself disappear, do as you wish.” Then the World-honored One had this thought, “Let me now manifest an appropriate supernormal power such that I send forth an extremely bright light, illuminating the entire domain of Brahmā while remaining invisible myself, so that Brahmā and his retinue will only hear my voice and not see my appearance.” Then the World-honored One manifested an appropriate supernormal power such that he sent forth an extremely bright light, illuminating the entire Brahmā world while remaining invisible himself, so that Brahmā and his retinue only heard his voice and did not see his appearance.^71 Then Brahmā and everyone in Brahmā’s retinue had this thought, “The renunciant Gotama is most wonderful, most remarkable. He has great super- normal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great divine might. Why is that? He has sent forth an extremely bright light, illuminating the entire Brahmā world while remaining invisible himself, so that I and my retinue only hear his voice and do not see his appearance.” Then the World-honored One had this thought, “I have already [performed] magical transformations for this Brahmā and his retinue. Now let me withdraw my supernormal power.” Then the World-honored One withdrew his supernormal power and returned to remain within the Brahmā world. Then King Māra again joined the assembly, up to three times.^72 At that time King Māra said to the World-honored One:

Great Seer, you see well, you know well, you realize well. But do not teach and instruct disciples, and do not teach the Dharma to disciples! Do not become attached to [having] disciples. Do not, through being attached [to having] disciples, take rebirth among the lowliest nymphs on the breaking up of the body at death. Practice non-action. [Just] expe rience happiness in the present life. Why is that? Great Seer, you will only trouble yourself in vain. Great Seer, in former times there were renunciants and brahmins who instructed disciples, taught disciples, and taught the Dharma to disciples.

They delighted in and became attached to [having] disciples. Through being attached to [having] disciples, they were reborn among the lowliest nymphs on the breaking up of the body at death. For this reason, Great Seer, I tell you, “Do not teach and instruct dis ciples, and do not teach the Dharma to disciples. Do not become attached to [having] disciples. Do not, through being attached to [having] disciples, take rebirth among the lowliest nymphs on the breaking up of the body at death. Practice nonaction. [Just] experience happiness in the present life. Why is that? Great Seer, you will only trouble yourself in vain.” Then the World-honored One said: Māra, Evil One, it is not because you seek benefit, welfare, happiness, or ease for me that you tell me, “Do not teach and instruct disciples and do not teach the Dharma to disciples. Do not become attached to [having] disciples. Do not, through being attached to [having] disciples, take rebirth among the lowliest nymphs on the breaking up of the body at death. Prac tice non-action. [Just] experience happiness in the present life. Why is that? Great Seer, you will only trouble yourself in vain.” Māra, Evil One, you have this thought: “This renunciant Gotama will teach the Dharma to disciples. Having heard the Dharma, the disciples will escape from my domain.” Māra, Evil One, it is for this reason that you tell me, “Do not teach and instruct disciples and do not teach the Dharma to disciples. Do not become attached to [having] disciples. Do not, through being attached to [having] disciples, take rebirth among the lowliest nymphs on the breaking up of the body at death. Practice non action. [Just] experience happiness in the present life. Why is that? Great Seer, you will only trouble yourself in vain.” Māra, Evil One, suppose that there have been renunciants and brahmins who instructed disciples, taught disciples, and taught the Dharma to dis ciples, who delighted in and became attached to [having] disciples, and who, through being attached to [having] disciples, were reborn among the lowliest nymphs on the breaking up of the body at death. Those renunciants and brahmins claimed to be renunciants without being renunciants, they claimed to be brahmins without being brahmins,

they claimed to be arahants without being arahants, they claimed to be fully awakened without being fully awakened. Māra, Evil One, I claim to be a renunciant while truly being a renun- ciant, I claim to be a brahmin while truly being a brahmin, I claim to be an arahant while truly being an arahant, I claim to be fully awakened while truly being fully awakened. Māra, Evil One, as to whether I do or do not teach the Dharma to dis- ciples—you just keep out of that! I now know for myself when it is proper to teach the Dharma to disciples and when it is not proper to teach the Dharma to disciples.^73 Such was the invitation by Brahmā and the opposition by Māra, the Evil One, to what the World-honored One said in response. For this reason this discourse is called “Brahmā’s Invitation to the Buddha.” Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Brahmā and his retinue were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma78-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M i 225 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN12.55-56]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DN11]], [[MN1]], [[MN72]], [[MN86]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA78]]
> ◄  [[ma77-bdk]] 📜  [[ma79-bdk]] ►
