---
sutta_code: "MA79"
sutta_title:
  - "Cūḷasaccaka Sutta "
  - "Shorter Discourse With Saccaka"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA79]]
> ◄  [[ma78-bdk]] 📜  [[ma80-bdk]] ►

### 79. The Discourse on the Existence of Higher Devas

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, staying in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. Then, the chamberlain Isidatta instructed a messenger:^75 Approach the Buddha, pay homage on my behalf at the World-honored One’s feet, and ask the World-honored One if the noble one is healthy and strong in body, comfortable and free from ailments, and dwelling at ease, with his usual vigor. Say this: “Chamberlain Isidatta pays homage at the Buddha’s feet and asks the World-honored One if the noble one is healthy and strong, comfortable and free from ailments, dwelling at ease, with his usual vigor.” When you have inquired of the Buddha in this way, you should approach Venerable Anuruddha and, having paid homage on my behalf at his feet, ask the venerable one if the noble one is healthy and strong, comfortable and free from ailments, and dwelling at ease, with his usual vigor. Say this: “Chamberlain Isidatta pays homage at Venerable Anuruddha’s feet and

asks the venerable one if the noble one is healthy and strong, comfortable and free from ailments, dwelling at ease, with his usual vigor. Chamberlain Isidatta invites Venerable Anuruddha, together [with three others,] four people in total, for tomorrow’s meal.” If he accepts the invitation, then also say this: “Venerable Anuruddha, Chamberlain Isidatta is very busy with many affairs, numerous affairs to be taken into consideration and managed for the king.^76 May Venerable Anuruddha [and his companions], four people in total, out of compassion come to Chamberlain Isidatta’s house tomorrow early in the morning.” Then, on having received these instructions from Chamberlain Isidatta, the messenger approached the Buddha, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet and, standing back to one side, said: World-honored One, Chamberlain Isidatta pays homage at the Buddha’s feet and asks if the World-honored One is healthy and strong, comfortable and free from ailments, dwelling at ease, with his usual vigor. At that time, the World-honored One said to the messenger, “May Cham berlain Isidatta find well-being and happiness! May all deva s, human beings, asura s, gandhabba s, yakkha s, and all other forms of life find well-being and happiness!” Then the messenger, having received well and remembered well what he had heard the Buddha say, paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and left. He approached Venerable Anuruddha, paid homage at his feet, stepped back, sat to one side, and said: Venerable Anuruddha, Chamberlain Isidatta pays homage at the feet of Venerable Anuruddha and asks the venerable one if the noble one is healthy and strong, comfortable and free from ailments, and dwelling at ease, with his usual vigor. Chamberlain Isidatta invites Venerable Anuruddha [together with three others], four people in total, for tomorrow’s meal. At that time Venerable Kaccāna the Real was seated in meditation not far from Venerable Anuruddha. Then Venerable Anuruddha said to Venerable Kaccāna:

Just now I was saying that we will go into Sāvatthī tomorrow morning to beg for almsfood, and now this has come up. Chamberlain Isidatta has dis- patched a messenger inviting us, four people altogether, for tomorrow’s meal. Venerable Kaccāna the Real said: May Venerable Anuruddha, for the sake of that man [the Chamberlain Isidatta], accept the invitation by remaining silent. Tomorrow morning we will leave this Sītavana and enter Sāvatthī [as if] to beg for almsfood. May Venerable Anuruddha, for the sake of that man, accept the invitation by remaining silent. Then, when the messenger understood that Venerable Anuruddha had accepted by remaining silent, he also made this request:

Chamberlain Isidatta says to Venerable Anuruddha, “Chamberlain Isidatta is very busy with many affairs, numerous affairs to attend to and manage for the king. May Venerable Anuruddha [and his companions], four people in total, out of compassion come to Chamberlain Isidatta’s house tomorrow early in the morning.” Venerable Anuruddha told the messenger, “You may return. I myself will know the proper time.” Then the messenger rose from his seat, paid homage, circumambulated [Venerable Anuruddha] three times, and left. Then, when the night was over, at dawn, Venerable Anuruddha put on his robes, took his bowl, and [with his companions], four people in total, approached the house of Chamberlain Isidatta. At that time, Chamberlain Isidatta was standing at the middle entrance [of his house], surrounded by the women [of his household], waiting for Venerable Anuruddha. He saw Venerable Anuruddha coming in the distance. On seeing him, he extended his hands with palms joined toward Venerable Anuruddha and respectfully said, “Welcome, Venerable Anuruddha! Venerable Anuruddha has not been here for a long time.” Then, respectfully supporting Venerable Anuruddha by the arm, Chamberlain Isidatta led him into the house and invited him to sit on a fine seat that had been set out for him. Venerable Anuruddha sat down on that seat. Chamberlain Isidatta paid homage at Venerable Anuruddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side.

Having sat down he said, “Venerable Anuruddha, I would like to ask a ques tion. May this meet with your permission!” Venerable Anuruddha said, “Chamberlain, ask what you wish. Having heard it, I will consider it.” Chamberlain Isidatta said: Venerable Anuruddha, some renunciants and brahmins come and tell me, “Chamberlain, you should develop the exalted liberation of the mind ( maha ggata ).” And, Venerable Anuruddha, other renunciants and brahmins come and tell me, “Chamberlain, you should develop the immeasurable liberation of the mind ( appamāṇa ).”^77 Venerable Anuruddha, [regarding] “exalted liberation of the mind” and “immeasurable liberation of the mind,” do these two liberations differ in both wording and meaning? Or do they differ only in wording while having the same meaning?” Venerable Anuruddha said, “Chamberlain, as to this question you have just asked, first answer it yourself; after that I shall answer.” Chamberlain Isidatta said: Venerable Anuruddha, [regarding] “exalted liberation of the mind” and “immeasurable liberation of the mind,” [I think] that these two liberations differ only in wording and have the same meaning. Chamberlain Isidatta was thus unable to answer the question [correctly]. Venerable Anuruddha said: Chamberlain, listen while I explain to you what is “exalted liberation of the mind” and what is “immeasurable liberation of the mind.” Regarding “exalted liberation of the mind,” suppose that a renunciant or brahmin, staying in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. Dwelling in reliance on this one tree, he achieves, through mental resolve, pervasion [of the area beneath the tree] with his exalted liberation of the mind. His liberation of the mind has this limit and does not go beyond it. Suppose that dwelling in reliance on not [just] one tree but two or three trees, [the renunciant or brahmin] achieves, through mental resolve, per vasion [of the area beneath those two or three trees] with his exalted lib eration of the mind. [Yet] his liberation of the mind has this limit and does

not go beyond it. Suppose that dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three trees but an [entire] forest, he achieves, through mental resolve, per- vasion [of that area] with his exalted liberation of the mind. [Yet] his lib- eration of the mind has this limit and does not go beyond it. Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one forest but two or three forests,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three forests but a village,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one village but two or three villages,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three villages but a country,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one country but two or three coun- tries,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three countries but this entire great Earth, as far as the great ocean, [the renunciant or brahmin] achieves, through mental resolve, pervasion [of that vast area] with his exalted liberation of the mind. [Yet] his liberation of the mind has this limit and does not go beyond it. This is what is meant by “exalted liberation of the mind.” Chamberlain, what is “immeasurable liberation of the mind”? Suppose that a renunciant or brahmin, staying in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. He dwells with a mind imbued with lov- ing-kindness, pervading one direction, likewise the second, the third, and the fourth directions, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. He dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, without fetters or resentment, without ill-will or contention, [a mind] that is boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. In the same way he dwells with a mind imbued with compassion,... with empathetic joy,... with equanimity, pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with equanimity, without fetters or resent- ment, without ill-will or contention, [a mind] that is boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well cultivated. This is what is meant by “immeasurable liberation of the mind.” Chamberlain, this “exalted liberation of the mind” and this “immea- surable liberation of the mind”—do these two liberations differ in both wording and meaning, or do they differ only in wording while having the same meaning?

Chamberlain Isidatta said to Venerable Anuruddha, “As I have [just now] heard it from the venerable one and consequently understood the meaning of it, these two liberations differ in wording and also in meaning.”^78 Venerable Anuruddha said: Chamberlain, there are [these] three classes of _deva_ s: the _deva_ s of radiance, the _deva_ s of pure radiance, and the _deva_ s of pervasive pure radiance.^79 Of these, the _deva_ s of radiance are born in one [particular] realm. They do not have the thought, “This belongs to me, that belongs to me”; instead, wherever these _deva_ s of radiance go, they delight in that place. Chamberlain, it is just as a fly on a piece of meat that does not have the thought, “This belongs to me, that belongs to me” and instead, wherever that fly goes on the piece of meat, it delights in that place.^80 In the same way, the _deva_ s of radiance do not have the thought, “This belongs to me, that belongs to me”; instead, wherever these _deva_ s of radiance go, they delight in that place. There are times when the _deva_ s of radiance assemble in one place. Then, although their bodies are different, their light is the same. Chamberlain, it is just as when a person lights numerous lamps and places them in one room; although those lamps are different, their light is the same. In the same way, when the _deva_ s of radiance assemble in one place, then, although their bodies are different, their light is the same. There are times when the _deva_ s of radiance separate from one another. When they are separate from one another, their bodies are different and their light is also different. Chamberlain, it is just as when a person takes numerous lamps from one room and places them separately in many different rooms; those lamps are different and their light also differs. It is the same when the _deva_ s of radiance separate from one another; when they are separate from one another, their bodies are different and their light also differs. Then Venerable Kaccāna the Real said, “Venerable Anuruddha, regarding those _deva_ s of radiance that are born in one realm, can one know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety?”^81 Venerable Anuruddha replied, “Venerable Kaccāna, regarding those _deva_ s of radiance that are born in one realm, it can be said that one can know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety.”

Venerable Kaccāna the Real asked further, “Venerable Anuruddha, regarding those _deva_ s of radiance that are born in one realm, what is the cause, what is the reason one can know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety?” Venerable Anuruddha replied: Venerable Kaccāna, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin, staying in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. Dwelling in reliance on this one tree, he achieves perception [of the area beneath the tree] with light produced through mental resolve. His perception with mentally produced light is extremely abundant. [Yet] his liberation of the mind has this limit and does not go beyond it. Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one tree but two or three trees, he achieves perception [of the area beneath those two or three trees] with light produced through mental resolve. His perception with mentally produced light is extremely abundant. [Yet] his liberation of the mind has this limit and does not go beyond it. Venerable Kaccāna, of these two liberations of mind, which is higher, which is superior, which is more subtle, which is better? Venerable Kaccāna the Real replied: Venerable Anuruddha, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one tree but two or three trees, achieves perception [of the area beneath those two or three trees] with light produced through mental resolve. His perception with mentally produced light is extremely abundant. [Yet] his liberation of the mind has this limit and does not go beyond it. Venerable Anuruddha, of these two liberations, the latter lib- eration is higher, superior, more subtle, the best. Venerable Anuruddha asked further: Venerable Kaccāna, suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three trees but a forest,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one forest but two or three forests,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three forests but a village,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one village but two or three villages,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three villages but

a country,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one country but two or three countries,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three countries but this entire great Earth, up to the great ocean, he achieves perception [of this vast area] with light produced through mental resolve. His perception with mentally produced light is extremely abundant. [Yet] his liberation of the mind has this limit and does not go beyond it. Venerable Kaccāna, of the [latter] two liberations of mind, which is higher, superior, more subtle, better? Venerable Kaccāna the Real replied: Venerable Anuruddha, suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three trees but a forest,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one forest but two or three forests,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three forests but a village,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one village but two or three vil lages,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three villages but a country,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] one country but two or three countries,... Suppose that, dwelling in reliance on not [just] two or three countries but on this entire great Earth, as far as the great ocean, a renunciant or a brahmin achieves perception [of this vast area] with light produced through mental resolve. His per ception with mentally produced light is extremely abundant. [Yet] his lib eration of the mind has this limit and does not go beyond it. Venerable Anuruddha, of the [latter] two liberations, the latter liberation is higher, superior, more subtle, better.” Venerable Anuruddha said: [Venerable] Kaccāna, this is the cause, this is why, regarding those deva s of radiance that are born in one realm, one can know their relative supe riority, their degrees of subtlety. Why is that? It is due to the relative supe riority of their minds when they were human beings. In their development there were degrees of refinement or crudeness. Because of the degrees of refinement or crudeness in their development, human beings have degrees of superiority. Venerable Kaccāna, the World-honored One has also explained the relative superiority among human beings in this way.^82

Venerable Kaccāna the Real asked further, “Venerable Anuruddha, regard- ing those _deva_ s of pure radiance that are born in one realm, can one know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety?” Venerable Anuruddha replied, “Venerable Kaccāna, regarding those _deva_ s of pure radiance that are born in one realm, it can be said that one can know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety.” Venerable Kaccāna the Real asked further, “Venerable Anuruddha, regard- ing those _deva_ s of pure radiance that are born in one realm, what is the cause, what is the reason that one can know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety?” Venerable Anuruddha replied: Venerable Kaccāna, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin, staying in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. Through mental resolve he achieves pervasion of the heaven of pure radiance. [However,] he does not develop this samādhi, does not practice it, does not expand it, does not accomplish it fully. At a later time, when the body breaks up at death, he is reborn among the _deva_ s of pure radiance. After being reborn [there] he does not attain supreme tranquility, does not attain supreme quietude, and does not complete his life course. Venerable Kaccāna, it is just like when a blue lotus, or a red or crimson lotus, or a white lotus is born in water, grows in water, and remains beneath the water. Its roots, stalks, flowers, and leaves are completely saturated with water; there is no part of it that is not saturated with water.^83 Venerable Kaccāna, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin, staying in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. Through mental resolve he achieves pervasion of the heaven of pure radiance. [However,] he does not develop this samādhi, does not practice it, does not expand it, does not accomplish it fully. When his body breaks up at death, he is reborn among the _deva_ s of pure radiance. After being reborn [there], he does not attain supreme tranquility, does not attain supreme quietude, and does not complete his life course. Again, Venerable Kaccāna, [suppose that] a renunciant or brahmin, staying in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. Through mental resolve he achieves pervasion of the heaven of pure

radiance. He frequently develops this samādhi, frequently practices it, frequently expands it, and accomplishes it fully. When his body breaks up at death he is reborn among the deva s of pure radiance. After being reborn there, he attains supreme tranquility, attains supreme quietude, and completes his life course. Venerable Kaccāna, it is just as when a blue lotus, or a red or crimson lotus, or a white lotus is born in water, grows in water, but then emerges above the water, where it is no longer saturated by water. In the same way, Venerable Kaccāna, a renunciant or brahmin, through mental resolve achieves pervasion of the heaven of pure radiance. He fre quently develops this samādhi, frequently practices it, frequently expands it, and accomplishes it fully. When his body breaks up at death he is reborn among the deva s of pure radiance. After being reborn there, he attains supreme tranquility, attains supreme quietude, and completes his life course. Venerable Kaccāna, this is the cause, this is why, regarding the deva s of pure radiance that are born in one realm, one can know their relative supe riority, their degrees of subtlety. Why is that? It is due to the relative supe riority of their minds when they were human beings. In their development there were degrees of refinement or crudeness. Because of the degrees of refinement or crudeness in their development, human beings have degrees of superiority. Venerable Kaccāna, the World-honored One has also explained the relative superiority among human beings in this way. Venerable Kaccāna the Real asked further, “Venerable Anuruddha, regard ing those deva s of pervasive pure radiance that are born in one realm, can one know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety?” Venerable Anuruddha replied, “Venerable Kaccāna, regarding those deva s of pervasive pure radiance that are born in one realm, it can be said that one can know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety.” Venerable Kaccāna the Real asked further: Venerable Anuruddha, regarding those deva s of pervasive pure radiance that are born in one realm, what is the cause, what is the reason that one can know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety? Venerable Anuruddha replied:

Venerable Kaccāna, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin, staying in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. Through mental resolve he achieves pervasion of the heaven of pervasive pure radiance. [Yet] he has not fully made an end of sloth-and-torpor, he has not well pacified restlessness-and-worry. At a later time, when his body breaks up at death, he is reborn among the _deva_ s of pervasive pure radiance. On being reborn [there], his radiance is not fully pure. Venerable Kaccāna, it is just like a lamp that burns in dependence on oil and a wick. If there are impurities in the oil and the wick is not pure, the light that arises in dependence on this lamp will not be bright and pure.^84 In the same way, Venerable Kaccāna, suppose that a renunciant or brah- min, staying in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. Through mental resolve he achieves pervasion of the heaven of pervasive pure radiance, [yet] he has not fully made an end of sloth-and- torpor, he has not well pacified restlessness-and-worry. When his body breaks up at death he is reborn among the _deva_ s of pervasive pure radiance. After being reborn [there] his radiance is not fully pure. Again, Venerable Kaccāna, suppose that a renunciant or brahmin, stay- ing in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. Through mental resolve he achieves pervasion of the heaven of pervasive pure radiance. He has fully made an end to sloth-and-torpor, and he has well pacified restlessness-and-worry. When his body breaks up at death he is reborn among the _deva_ s of pervasive pure radiance. After being reborn [there] his radiance is fully pure. Venerable Kaccāna, it is just like a lamp that burns in dependence on oil and wick. If there are no impurities in the oil and the wick is also fully pure, the light that arises in dependence on this lamp will be fully bright and pure. In the same way, Venerable Kaccāna, suppose that a renunciant or brah- min, staying in a forest area, goes to the base of a tree in an empty quiet place. Through mental resolve he achieves pervasion of the heaven of pervasive pure radiance. He has fully made an end of sloth-and-torpor, and he has well pacified restlessness-and-worry. When his body breaks up at death he is reborn among the _deva_ s of pervasive pure radiance. After being reborn [there] his radiance is fully pure.

Venerable Kaccāna, this is the cause, this is the reason why, regarding those _deva_ s of pervasive pure radiance that are born in one realm, one can know their relative superiority, their degrees of subtlety. Why is that? It is due to the relative superiority of their minds when they were human beings. In their development there were degrees of refinement or crudeness. Because of the degrees of refinement or crudeness in their development, human beings have degrees of superiority. Venerable Kaccāna, the World- honored One has also explained the relative superiority among human beings in this way. Then Venerable Kaccāna the Real spoke in praise [of Anuruddha] to Cham- berlain Isidatta:

It is well, it is well, Chamberlain! You have greatly benefited us. Why is that? You first asked Venerable Anuruddha about the existence of higher _deva_ s. We had never before heard from Venerable Anuruddha such an explanation of these _deva_ s, namely that these _deva_ s exist and that these _deva_ s are like this.^85 Then Venerable Anuruddha said: Venerable Kaccāna, there are many such _deva_ s. [Even] this sun and moon, which are of such great supernormal power and such great and mighty virtue, such great merit, such great divine might, yet their brilliance is not equal to the brilliance [of the _deva_ s] I have personally met, with whom I have exchanged greetings and conversed, and from whom I have received responses. Yet I have never before given such an explanation of these _deva_ s, namely that these _deva_ s exist and that these _deva_ s are like this. At that time, Chamberlain Isidatta, understanding that the discussion of those venerable ones was finished, rose from his seat and personally brought water for washing. With his own hands he prepared assorted pure and tasty dishes to eat, savor, and digest, making sure there was enough to eat. After [Venerable Anuruddha] had finished eating, put aside his bowl, and washed his hands, [Chamberlain Isidatta] took a low seat and sat to one side to listen to the Dharma. When Chamberlain Isidatta had sat down, Venerable Anu- ruddha taught him the Dharma, exhorting and inspiring him, fully delighting

him. Having taught [Chamberlain Isidatta] the Dharma with countless skillful means, having exhorted and inspired him, and fully delighted him, [Venerable Anuruddha] rose from his seat and departed. Thus spoke the venerable Anuruddha. Having heard what Venerable Anu- ruddha said, Chamberlain Isidatta and the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.^86


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma79-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M i 227 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN1.4]], [[JA509]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN10.29]], [[MA72]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA79]]
> ◄  [[ma78-bdk]] 📜  [[ma80-bdk]] ►
