---
sutta_code: "MA80"
sutta_title:
  - "Cūḷataṇhāsaṅkhaya Sutta "
  - "Shorter Discourse on the Ending of Craving"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA80]]
> ◄  [[ma79-bdk]] 📜  [[ma81-bdk]] ►

### 80. The Discourse on Cloth for Robes

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Sāvatthī, staying in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time Venerable Anuruddha was also at Sāvatthī, staying on a moun- tain crag with _sāla_ trees. Then, when the night was over, at dawn, Venerable Anuruddha put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered Sāvatthī to beg for almsfood. At dawn Venerable Ānanda also put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered Sāvatthī to beg for almsfood. Venerable Anuruddha saw that Venerable Ānanda was also going to beg for almsfood. Having seen him, he said, “Venerable Ānanda, you should know that my three robes have become rough, faded, and worn out. Venerable friend, now could you invite the monks to make robes for me?” Venerable Ānanda accepted Venerable Anuruddha’s request by remaining silent. Then, when Venerable Ānanda had completed begging for alms and after he had partaken of the midday meal, he put away his robe and bowl and washed his hands and feet. With a sitting mat over his shoulder and holding a door key in his hand, he went from hut to hut and said to each monk he visited, “Venerable one, come to the mountain crag with _sāla_ trees to make robes for Venerable Anuruddha.” Then the monks, having heard what Venerable Ānanda said, all went to the mountain crag with _sāla_ trees to make robes for Venerable Anuruddha. Then the World-honored One saw Venerable Ānanda going from hut to hut with a door key in his hand. Having seen him, he asked, “Ānanda, in regard to what matter are you going from hut to hut with a door key in your hand?” Venerable Ānanda said, “World-honored One, I have just now asked the monks to make robes for Venerable Anuruddha.”

The World-honored One said, “Ānanda, why did you not ask the Tathāgata to [help] make robes for the monk Anuruddha?” Then Venerable Ānanda extended his hands with palms joined toward the Buddha and said, “May the World-honored One come to the mountain crag with sāla trees to make robes for Venerable Anuruddha.” The World-honored One accepted Venerable Ānanda’s invitation by remaining silent. Then the World-honored One, in the company of Venerable Ānanda, went to the mountain crag with sāla trees. Spreading out his sitting mat, he sat down in front of the company of monks. At that time, on the mountain crag with sāla trees there were eight hundred monks seated together with the World-honored One to make robes for Venerable Anuruddha. At that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was also among the assembly. Then the World-honored One said, “Moggallāna, I can spread out the cloth and cut it to size for Anuruddha, then cut it into pieces, stitch them together, and sew it up.” At that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna rose from his seat, arranged his robe to bare one shoulder, and, extending his hands with palms joined toward the Buddha, said to the World-honored One, “May the World-honored One spread out the cloth and cut it to size for Venerable Anuruddha. The monks will then cut it into pieces, stitch them together, and sew them up.” Then the World-honored One spread out the cloth and cut it to size for Venerable Anuruddha. The monks together cut it into pieces, stitched them together, and sewed them up. In a single day they completed three robes for Venerable Anuruddha. At that time, when the World-honored One knew that the three robes for Venerable Anuruddha had been completed, he said, “Anuruddha, address the monks on the nature of the cloth for robes ( kaṭhina ) [and of the one who will wear it]. I have a backache now and wish to rest a little.” Venerable Anuruddha replied, “Yes, World-honored One.” Then the World-honored One folded his outer robe into four and placed it on a bed, folded the inner robe to use as a pillow, and lay down on his right side, one foot upon the other, arousing the perception of light, establishing right mindfulness and right comprehension, constantly keeping in mind the thought of rising again. At that time Venerable Anuruddha addressed the monks:

Venerable friends, when I had not yet gone forth to train in the path, I had [already] become weary of birth, old age, disease, death, sorrow and distress, weeping and lamentation, and I aspired to abandon this great mass of _dukkha._ Venerable friends, having become weary, I had this contemplation: “The household life is confined, a dusty place; going forth to train in the path is [like] emerging into a vast open space. Now for me at home, chained with [such] chains, it is not possible to completely devote my life to the practice of the holy life. Let me forsake my wealth, little or much, forsake my relatives, few or many, shave off my beard and hair, don the yellow robe and, out of faith, leave the home life and become homeless to train in the path.” Venerable friends, at a later time I abandoned my wealth, little or much, left behind my relatives, few or many, shaved off my beard and hair, donned the yellow robe and, out of faith, left the home life and became homeless to train in the path. Venerable friends, having gone forth to train in the path, having forsaken family life, I received the training of monk- hood. I practiced the precepts and guarded [against breaking] the code of rules. I also carefully maintained proper conduct and etiquette, always fearing the slightest fault, upholding the training in the precepts. Venerable friends, I abstained from killing, having abandoned killing. I had discarded sword and club, I had a sense of shame and scruple, and a mind of loving-kindness and compassion, [wishing to] benefit all [beings], including insects. I purified my mind with regard to killing living beings. Venerable friends, I abstained from taking what was not given, having abandoned taking what was not given. I took [only] what was given, delighting in taking [only] what was given. I always liked to give gener- ously, rejoicing in nonstinginess and not expecting any reward. I purified my mind with regard to taking what was not given. Venerable friends, I abstained from sexual activity, having abandoned sexual activity. I diligently cultivated the practice of celibacy, and ener- getically [maintained this] immaculate conduct, pure, without defilement, free from sensual desires, having abandoned sexual desires. I purified my mind with regard to sexual activity. Venerable friends, I abstained from false speech, having abandoned false speech. I spoke the truth, delighting in the truth, unshakably established

in the truth, being completely trustworthy, not deceiving [anyone in] the world. I purified my mind with regard to false speech. Venerable friends, I abstained from divisive speech, having abandoned divisive speech. I did not engage in speech that was divisive and that would harm others. Hearing something from this person, I did not tell it to that person in order to harm this person; hearing something from that person, I did not tell it to this person in order to harm that person. I wished to unite those that were divided, delighting in their unity. I did not create factions, did not delight in or praise factions. I purified my mind with regard to divisive speech. Venerable friends, I abstained from harsh speech, having abandoned harsh speech. Whatever speech there is that is rough and rude in tone, that sounds offensive and grates on the ear, that people neither enjoy nor desire, that causes others suffering and vexation, and that does not lead to calmness—such speech I had abandoned. Whatever speech there is that is pure, peaceful, gentle, and beneficial, that is pleasant to the ear and [easily] enters the mind, that is enjoyable and desirable, that gives others happiness, speech endowed with meaning, that does not make others afraid, and that leads to calmness in others—such [kinds of] speech I spoke. I purified my mind with regard to harsh speech. Venerable friends, I abstained from frivolous speech, having abandoned frivolous speech. I spoke at the [proper] time, I spoke what is true, what is Dharma, what is meaningful, what is peaceful. Delighting in speech that is peaceful and of the type that is at the proper time and in the proper way, I would teach well and admonish well. I purified my mind with regard to frivolous speech. Venerable friends, I abstained from earning profits, having abandoned earning profits. I had discarded weights and measures and did not accept goods [on commission], I did not bind people [with debts], I did not try to cheat with measures, nor did I deceive others for the sake of some small profit. I purified my mind with regard to earning profits. Venerable friends, I abstained from accepting widows or girls, having abandoned accepting widows or girls. I purified my mind with regard to accepting widows or girls.

Venerable friends, I abstained from accepting male or female slaves, having abandoned accepting male or female slaves. I purified my mind with regard to accepting male or female slaves. Venerable friends, I abstained from accepting elephants, horses, cattle, or sheep, having abandoned accepting elephants, horses, cattle, or sheep. I purified my mind with regard to accepting elephants, horses, cattle, or sheep. Venerable friends, I abstained from accepting chickens or swine, having abandoned accepting chickens or swine. I purified my mind with regard to accepting chickens or swine. Venerable friends, I abstained from accepting farmland or marketplaces, having abandoned accepting farmland or marketplaces. I purified my mind with regard to accepting farmland or marketplaces. Venerable friends, I abstained from accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes, having abandoned accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes. I purified my mind with regard to accepting uncooked rice, wheat, or legumes. Venerable friends, I abstained from alcoholic beverages, having aban- doned alcoholic beverages. I purified my mind with regard to alcoholic beverages. Venerable friends, I abstained from [reclining on] high and wide beds, having abandoned [reclining on] high and wide beds. I purified my mind with regard to high and wide beds. Venerable friends, I abstained from [using] flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics, having abandoned [using] flower garlands, neck- laces, perfumes, and cosmetics. I purified my mind with regard to flower garlands, necklaces, perfumes, and cosmetics. Venerable friends, I abstained from singing, dancing, and acting, and from going to see or hear [singing, dancing, and acting]; I had abandoned singing, dancing, and acting, and [abandoned] going to see or hear [singing, dancing, and acting]. I purified my mind with regard to singing, dancing, and acting, and [with regard to] going to see or hear [singing, dancing, and acting]. Venerable friends, I abstained from accepting gold and silver, having abandoned accepting gold and silver. I purified my mind with regard to accepting gold and silver.

Venerable friends, I abstained from eating after noon, having abandoned eating after noon. I took a single meal [each day], not eating at night, training in eating [only] at the [proper] time. I purified my mind with regard to eating after noon. Venerable friends, having accomplished this noble aggregate of virtue, I further trained in supreme contentment, taking robes [only] to cover my body, taking [only enough] food to sustain the physical body. Wherever I went, I took [just] robes and bowl with me, without concern or longing. Just as a wild goose flies through the air with [only] its two wings, ven erable friends, I was like that, wherever I went, taking [just] robes and bowl with me, without concern or longing. Venerable friends, having accomplished this noble aggregate of virtue and this supreme contentment, I further trained in guarding the senses. Always mindful of stopping thoughts of desire, with clear understanding, successfully guarding the mind through mindfulness, I constantly aroused right comprehension. On seeing a form with the eyes I did not grasp at its appearance, nor did I savor the form. That is to say, for the sake of restraint I guarded the eye faculty so that no covetousness or sorrow, evil and unwholesome states, would arise in the mind. To that end I guarded the eye faculty. In the same way, on [hearing a sound] with the ears,... [smelling an odor] with the nose,... [tasting a flavor], with the tongue... [experiencing a tangible] with the body,... coming to know a mental object with the mind, I did not grasp at its appearance nor did I savor the mental object. That is to say, for the sake of restraint I guarded the mind faculty so that no covetousness or sorrow, evil and unwholesome states, would arise in the mind. To that end I guarded the mind faculty. Venerable friends, having accomplished this noble aggregate of virtue, this supreme contentment, and this guarding of the senses, I further trained in right comprehension when going out or coming in, contemplating and distinguishing well when bending or stretching [my limbs], when lowering or raising [my head]; with orderly manner and appearance, I properly car ried the outer robe, the other robes, and the bowl; when walking, standing, sitting, and reclining, when going to sleep or waking up, when speaking or keeping silent, I always had right comprehension.

Venerable friends, having accomplished this noble aggregate of virtue, this supreme contentment, this guarding of the senses, and this right com- prehension when going out or coming in, I further trained in dwelling alone in seclusion. I stayed in a forest area, or at the base of a tree in an empty peaceful place, in a mountain cave, on a heap of straw in an open place, in the midst of a forest, or in a cemetery. Venerable friends, staying in a forest, or having gone to the base of a tree in an empty peaceful place, I spread out my sitting mat and sat down cross-legged, body erect. With right mental aspiration and undivided mind- fulness, I abandoned and removed covetousness. With my mind free from agitation, on seeing others’ wealth and requisites of living, I did not give rise to covetousness, did not wish “May I get it!” I purified my mind with regard to covetousness. In the same way I abandoned ill-will,... sloth- and-torpor,... restlessness-and-worry ,... doubt, overcoming delusion, becoming free from vacillation in regard to wholesome states. I purified my mind with regard to doubt. Venerable friends, when I had abandoned these five hindrances, which defile the mind and weaken wisdom, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states,... up to... dwell having attained the fourth absorption. Venerable friends, having thus attained samādhi, with a mind purified and without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, with a mind that had attained imperturbability, I trained in the realization of supernormal powers. Venerable friends, I attained immeasurable supernormal powers— namely, being one, I became many; being many, I became one [again]. Being one, I remained one, possessed of knowledge and vision. I passed unhindered through stone walls as if passing through space. I dived into the earth as if it were water; I walked on water as if it were earth. Seated cross-legged, I ascended into space like a bird. With my hand I touched and stroked the sun and the moon, which are of such great supernormal power, such great and mighty virtue, such great merit, such great divine might. With my [mental] body I reached as far as the Brahmā world. Venerable friends, having attained samādhi in this way, with a mind that is purified and without defilement, without affliction, malleable,

well steadied, a mind that has attained imperturbability, I trained in and realized the supernormal knowledge of the divine ear. Venerable friends, with the divine ear I heard sounds made by human and non-human beings, near and far, subtle and not subtle. Venerable friends, having attained samādhi in this way, with a mind purified and without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, with a mind that has attained imperturbability, I trained in and realized the supernormal knowledge of the minds of others. Venerable friends, through the knowledge of the minds of others I knew the minds of others as they really are: how other beings think, intend, do, and act. I knew a mind with desire as a mind with desire, as it really is; I knew a mind without desire as a mind without desire, as it really is,... a mind with hatred,... without hatred,... with delusion,... without delusion,... defiled,... undefiled,... contracted,... distracted,... superior,... inferior,... narrow,... expansive,... developed,... unde- veloped,... collected,... uncollected;... I knew an unliberated mind as an unliberated mind, as it really is; I knew a liberated mind as a liberated mind, as it really is. Venerable friends, having attained samādhi in this way, with a mind purified and without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, with a mind that had attained imperturbability, I trained in and realized the supernormal knowledge of recollection of past lives. Venerable friends, I recalled countless lives I had traversed in the past, with their activities and appearances: one birth, two births, a hundred births, a thousand births, eons of [world] contraction, eons of [world] expansion, countless eons of [world] contraction and expansion. [I recalled:] “[I was] that living being named So-and-so; in that former life I went through those experiences; I was [once] born there, with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of food and drink; I experienced this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this. Dying here, I was reborn there; dying there, I was reborn here. I was reborn here with this family name and this given name; I had this type of life and this type of food and drink; I experienced this type of pleasure and pain; my life span was like this, I survived this long, and my life ended like this.”

Venerable friends, having attained samādhi in this way, with a mind purified and without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, with a mind that had attained imperturbability, I trained in and realized the supernormal knowledge of birth and death. Venerable friends, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses human [vision], I saw beings as they died and were reborn. [I saw them reborn] as handsome or ugly, superior or inferior, coming and going between good and bad realms of existence, in accordance with the [pre- vious] deeds of those living beings. This I saw as it really is. If these living beings engaged in evil bodily conduct, evil verbal and mental conduct; if they reviled noble ones, held wrong views, and per- formed actions [based on] wrong views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking up of the body after death, [they] certainly go to a bad realm of existence, being reborn in hell. If, [however,] these living beings engaged in good bodily conduct, good verbal and mental conduct, if they did not revile noble ones, held right views, and performed actions [based on] right views, then because of these causes and conditions, at the breaking up of the body after death, [they] certainly go to a good realm of existence, ascending to be reborn in heaven. Venerable friends, having attained samādhi in this way, with a mind purified and without defilement, without affliction, malleable, well steadied, with a mind that had attained imperturbability, I trained in and realized the supernormal knowledge of the destruction of the taints. Venerable friends, I knew _dukkha_ as it really is, knew the arising of _dukkha,_... knew the cessation of _dukkha,_... and knew the path to the cessation of _dukkha,_ as it really is. I knew the taints as they really are, knew the arising of the taints,... knew the cessation of the taints,... and knew the path to the cessation of the taints as it really is. Knowing like this, seeing like this, my mind was liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of existence and from the taint of ignorance. It being liberated, I knew it was liberated. I understood as it really is: “Birth has been ended; the holy life has been established; what had to be done has been done; there will not be another experiencing of existence.”

Venerable friends, if a monk transgresses against the precepts, breaks the precepts, falls short of the precepts, violates the precepts, defiles the precepts, blackens the precepts; and if relying on the precepts, established in the precepts, using the precepts as his ladder he wishes to ascend to the hall of unsurpassable wisdom, to the pavilion of the true Dharma, that is impossible. Venerable friends, it is as if not far from a village there is a viewing tower surmounted by a pavilion, and inside the tower a ladder with ten or twelve rungs had been set up. If a person comes along wanting to ascend to that pavilion, then if he does not mount the first rung of the ladder, desiring instead to [directly] mount the second rung, that is impossible. If he does not mount the second rung of the ladder, desiring instead to [directly] mount the third or fourth rung to ascend to the pavilion, that too is impossible. In the same way, venerable friends, if a monk transgresses against the precepts, breaks the precepts, falls short of the precepts, violates the pre cepts, defiles the precepts, blackens the precepts; and if relying on the precepts, established in the precepts, and using the precepts as his ladder he wishes to ascend to the hall of unsurpassable wisdom, to the pavilion of the true Dharma, that is impossible. Venerable friends, if a monk does not transgress against the precepts, break the precepts, fall short of the precepts, violate the precepts, defile the precepts, or blacken the precepts; and if relying on the precepts, estab lished in the precepts, and using the precepts as his ladder he wishes to ascend to the hall of unsurpassable wisdom, to the pavilion of the true Dharma, that is certainly possible. Venerable friends, it is as if, not far from a village there is a viewing tower surmounted by a pavilion, and inside the tower a ladder with ten or twelve rungs had been set up. If a person comes along wanting to ascend to that pavilion, then if he mounts the first rung of the ladder, and then wishes to mount the second rung, that is certainly possible. And if, having mounted the second rung, he wishes to mount the third rung, and then the fourth, to ascend to the pavilion, that is certainly possible. In the same way, venerable friends, if a monk does not transgress against the precepts, break the precepts, fall short of the precepts, violate

the precepts, defile the precepts, or blacken the precepts; and if relying on the precepts, established in the precepts, and using the precepts as his ladder he wishes to ascend to the hall of unsurpassable wisdom, to the pavilion of the true Dharma, that is certainly possible. Venerable friends, relying on the precepts, established in the precepts, using the precepts as my ladder, I ascended to the hall of unsurpassable wisdom, to the pavilion of the true Dharma and, with little effort, I observed the thousand worlds. Venerable friends, it was just as a man with [good] eyesight might stand on top of a tall building and, with little effort, observe the ground below, seeing a thousand earthen bricks.^87 In the same way, venerable friends, relying on the precepts, established in the precepts, using the precepts as my ladder, I ascended to the hall of unsurpassable wisdom, to the pavilion of the true Dharma and, with little effort, I observed the thousand worlds. Venerable friends, [for me to try] to hide these six supernormal knowl- edges would be like using a palm leaf [to try] to hide a king’s great elephant, or his seven treasures, let alone eight of them. Venerable friends, if [anyone] has doubts about my realization of the supernormal powers, let him ask about it. I shall reply. Venerable friends, if [anyone] has doubts about my realization of the supernormal knowledge of the divine ear, let him ask about it. I shall reply. Venerable friends, if [anyone] has doubts about my realization of the supernormal knowledge of the minds of others, let him ask about it. I shall reply. Venerable friends, if [anyone] has doubts about my realization of the supernormal knowledge of recollection of past lives, let him ask about it. I shall reply. Venerable friends, if [anyone] has doubts about my realization of the supernormal knowledge of birth and death, let him ask about it. I shall reply. Venerable friends, if [anyone] has doubts about my realization of the supernormal knowledge of the destruction of the taints, let him ask about it. I shall reply.

Then Venerable Ānanda said:

Venerable Anuruddha, on this mountain crag with _sāla_ trees there are eight hundred monks sitting together with the World-honored One in their midst, to make robes for Venerable Anuruddha. If [anyone] has doubts

about Venerable Anuruddha’s realization of the supernormal powers, let him ask about it. Venerable Anuruddha will reply. If [anyone] has doubts about Venerable Anuruddha’s realization of the supernormal knowledge of the divine ear, let him ask about it. Venerable Anuruddha will reply. If [anyone] has doubts about Venerable Anuruddha’s realization of the super normal knowledge of the minds of others, let him ask about it. Venerable Anuruddha will reply. If [anyone] has doubts about Venerable Anuruddha’s realization of the supernormal knowledge of recollection of past lives, let him ask about it. Venerable Anuruddha will reply. If [anyone] has doubts about Venerable Anuruddha’s realization of the supernormal knowledge of birth and death, let him ask about it. Venerable Anuruddha will reply. If [anyone] has doubts about Venerable Anuruddha’s realization of the supernormal knowledge of the destruction of the taints, let him ask about it. Venerable Anuruddha will reply. However, we have for a long time known, in our minds, the mind of Venerable Anuruddha—namely that Venerable Anuruddha is of great super normal power, great and mighty virtue, great merit, great divine might. By then the World-honored One’s affliction had ceased and he was at ease, so he rose and sat cross-legged. Having sat up, the World-honored One praised Venerable Anuruddha: It is well, it is well, Anuruddha! It is excellent, Anuruddha, how you have addressed the monks on the nature of the cloth for robes [and of the one who will wear it]. Anuruddha, address the monks again on the nature of the cloth for robes [and of the one who will wear it]! Anuruddha, address the monks frequently on the nature of the cloth for robes [and of the one who will wear it]! Then the World-honored One said to the monks: Monks, receive the [teaching] on the nature of the cloth for robes [and of the one who will wear it]! Recite the [teaching] on the nature of the cloth for robes [and of the one who will wear it]! Bear well in mind the [teaching] on the nature of the cloth for robes [and of the one who will wear it]! Why is that? The [teaching] on the nature of the cloth for robes [and of the one who will wear it] is connected with the Dharma. This is a basis of the holy

life, which leads to attainment, which leads to awakening, which leads to nirvana. A clansman who has shaved off his beard and hair, donned the yel- low robes, and out of faith left home life, becoming homeless to train in the path, should attentively receive the [teaching] on the nature of the cloth for robes [and of the one who will wear it] and bear them well in mind. Why is that? Because I do not see any monk in the past for whom such a robe was made who was like the monk Anuruddha. Nor do I see in the future or at present any monk for whom such a robe will be made or is being made, as it is for the monk Anuruddha. Why is that? Because now on this mountain crag with _sāla_ trees there are eight hundred monks sitting together with the World-honored One in their midst, to make robes for Venerable Anuruddha. In this respect, the monk Anuruddha is of great supernormal power, of great and mighty virtue, of great merit, of great divine might. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Anuruddha and the [other] monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma80-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | M i 251 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA80]]
> ◄  [[ma79-bdk]] 📜  [[ma81-bdk]] ►
