---
sutta_code: "MA81"
sutta_title:
  - "Mahātaṇhāsaṅkhaya Sutta "
  - "Longer Discourse on the Ending of Craving"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA81]]
> ◄  [[ma80-bdk]] 📜  [[ma82-bdk]] ►

### 81. The Discourse on Mindfulness of the Body

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha, who was wandering in Aṅga country with a great company of monks, went toward Āpaṇa, the dwelling- place of Keṇiya [the fire-worshiper]. Then, when the night was over, at dawn, the World-honored One put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered Āpaṇa to beg for almsfood. After having partaken of the midday meal, he put away his robes and bowl, washed his hands and feet, put his sitting mat over his shoulder, and went into a forest. Entering the forest, he went to the base of a tree, spread his sitting mat, and sat down cross-legged. At that time, after the midday meal, many monks were sitting together in the assembly hall discussing this topic:

Venerable friends, it is marvelous, it is very special how the World-honored One has explained the cultivation of mindfulness of the body, making much of it by thorough knowledge, thorough contemplation, thorough cultivation, and thoroughly guarding it, as something with which to be well endowed, to be practiced well with a unified mind. The Buddha has

declared such mindfulness of the body to bring great fruits: the gaining of vision and the possession of the vision that sees the highest benefit. At that time the World-honored One, sitting in meditation, with the purified divine ear that surpasses that of human beings, heard the monks sitting together in the assembly hall after the midday meal, discussing this topic: Venerable friends, it is marvelous, it is very special how the World-honored One has explained the cultivation of mindfulness of the body, making much of it by thorough knowledge, thorough contemplation, thorough cultivation, and thoroughly guarding it, as something with which to be well endowed, to be practiced well with a unified mind. The Buddha has declared such mindfulness of the body to bring great fruits: the gaining of vision and the possession of the vision that sees the highest benefit. Having heard this, in the afternoon the World-honored One rose from sitting in meditation, approached the assembly hall, and sat before the sangha of monks on a seat that had been prepared. Then the World-honored One said to the monks, “What topic have you been discussing? For what topic are you sitting together in the assembly hall?” Then the monks replied: World-honored One, we monks have been sitting together in the assembly hall after the midday meal discussing this topic: “Venerable friends, it is marvelous, it is very special how the World-honored One has explained the cultivation of mindfulness of the body, making much of it by thorough knowledge, thorough contemplation, thorough cultivation, and thoroughly guarding it, as something with which to be well endowed, to be practiced well with a unified mind. The Buddha has declared such mindfulness of the body to bring great fruits: the gaining of vision and the possession of the vision that sees the highest benefit.” World-honored One, this is the topic that we have been discussing. It is for this topic that we have been sitting together in the assembly hall. The World-honored One said again to the monks, “How did I explain that the cultivation of mindfulness of the body, making much of it, will bring great fruits?”

Then, the monks said to the World-honored One: The World-honored One is the source of the Dharma, the World-honored One is the master of the Dharma, the Dharma comes from the World-hon- ored One. May he explain it! Having heard it, we will come to know its meaning fully. The Buddha said, “Listen closely and pay proper attention! I shall explain its meaning to you.” Then the monks listened to receive instruction. The Buddha said:^89 How does a monk cultivate mindfulness of the body? When walking, a monk knows he is walking; when standing, he knows he is standing; when sitting, he knows he is sitting; when lying down, he knows he is lying down; when falling asleep, he knows he is falling asleep; when waking up, he knows he is waking up; when falling asleep or waking up, he knows he is falling asleep or waking up.^90 In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body.^91 Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. When going out and coming in, a monk clearly knows, contemplates, and discerns [this action] well; when bending or stretching, lowering or raising [any of his limbs], he does so with appropriate deportment; when wearing his outer robe and other robes and [carrying his] bowl, he does so properly; when walking, standing, sitting, lying down, falling asleep, waking up, speaking, and keeping silent—all [of these activities] he clearly knows.^92 In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body.

Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. When evil and unwholesome thoughts arise, a monk controls, abandons, erad icates, and stops them by recollecting wholesome states.^93 It is just as a carpenter or a carpenter’s apprentice might apply an inked string to a piece of wood [to mark a straight line] and then trims the wood with a sharp adze to make it straight.^94 In the same way, when evil unwhole some thoughts arise a monk controls, abandons, eradicates, and stops them by recollecting wholesome states. In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. With teeth clenched and tongue pressed against his palate, a monk uses [his own will-power] to control his mind, to control, abandon, eradicate, and stop [evil thoughts]. It is just as two strong men might seize a weak man and, turning him this way and that, beat him up as they wish. In the same way, with teeth clenched and tongue pressed against his palate, a monk uses [his own will-power] to control his mind, to control, abandon, eradicate, and stop [evil thoughts]. In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk is mindful of breathing in and knows he is mindful of breathing in; he is mindful of breathing out and knows he is mindful of breathing out. When breathing in long, he knows he is breathing in long; when breathing out long, he knows he is breathing out long. When breathing in short, he knows he is breathing in short; when breathing out short, he knows he is breathing out short.

He trains [in experiencing] the whole body when breathing in; he trains [in experiencing] the whole body when breathing out. He trains in calming bodily activities when breathing in; he trains in calming activities when breathing out.^95 In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk completely drenches and pervades his body with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion [experienced in the first absorption], so that there is no part within his body that is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.^96 It is just as when a bath attendant, having filled a vessel with bathing powder, mixes it with water and kneads it so that no part [of the powder] is not completely drenched and pervaded with water. In the same way, a monk completely drenches and pervades his body with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, so that no part within his body is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk completely drenches and pervades his body with rapture and pleasure born of samādhi [experienced in the second absorption], so that there is no part within his body that is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of samādhi. It is just like a mountain spring that is full and overflowing with clear, clean water; water coming from any of the four directions cannot enter it, with the springwater welling up from the bottom on its own, flowing

out and flooding the surroundings, completely drenching and pervading every part of the mountain. In the same way, a monk completely drenches and pervades his body with rapture and pleasure born of samādhi, so that no part within his body is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of samādhi. In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk completely drenches and pervades his body with pleasure born of the absence of rapture [experienced in the third absorption], so that there is no part within his body that is not pervaded by pleasure born of the absence of rapture. It is just like when a blue, red, or white lotus that is born in the water and has come to full growth in the water, remains submerged in water, with every part of its roots, stem, flower, and leaves completely drenched and pervaded [by water], with no part that is not pervaded by it. In the same way, a monk completely drenches and pervades his body with pleas ure born of the absence of rapture so that no part within his body is not pervaded by pleasure born of the absence of rapture. In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk mentally resolves to dwell having accomplished a complete pervasion of his body with mental purity [experienced in the fourth absorption], so that there is no part within his body that is not pervaded by mental purity. It is just as a person might cover himself from head to foot with a cloth measuring seven or eight cubits, so that every part of his body is covered.^97 In the same way, a monk completely pervades his body with mental purity

[experienced in the fourth absorption], so that no part within his body is not pervaded by mental purity. In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk is mindful of the perception of light ( _ālokasaññā_ ), properly taking hold of it, properly retaining it, and recollecting it properly with mindfulness, [so that he perceives that] what is behind is like what is in front, what is in front is like what is behind, night is like day, day is like night, what is above is like what is below, and what is below is like what is above. In this way he develops an undistorted and undefiled state of mind that is bright and clear, a state of mind totally unobscured by impediments.^98 In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilement from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk properly grasps the reviewing sign,^99 recollecting it properly with mind- fulness. It is just as a person who is seated might contemplate another person who is lying down, or one who is lying down might contemplate another person who is seated. In the same way, a monk properly grasps the reviewing sign, recollecting it properly with mindfulness. In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body.

Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk contemplates this body from head to foot, according to its position and its attractive and repulsive [qualities], [seeing it] as full of various kinds of impurities, [reflecting:] “Within this body [of mine] there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, rough and smooth epidermis, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, large and small intestine, spleen, stom ach, feces, brain and brain stem, tears, sweat, mucus, saliva, pus, blood, fat, marrow, phlegm, bile, and urine.” It is just as a person endowed with eyesight, on seeing a container full of various seeds, can clearly distinguish them all, identifying [the vaious seeds] as rice seeds, millet seeds, barley, wheat, hemp seeds, sesame seeds, beans, turnip seeds, and mustard seeds.^100 In the same way, a monk con templates this body from head to foot, according to its position and its attractive and repulsive [qualities], [seeing it] as full of various kinds of impurities, [reflecting:] “Within this body [of mine] there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, rough and smooth epidermis, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, large and small intestine, spleen, stom ach, feces, brain and brain stem, tears, sweat, mucus, saliva, pus, blood, fat, marrow, phlegm, bile, and urine.” In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk contemplates the body [as made up of] elements: “Within this body of mine there is the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element, and the consciousness element.”^101 It is just as a butcher, on having slaughtered and skinned a cow, might divide it into six parts and spread them on the ground [to sell them]. In the same way, a monk contemplates the body [as made up of] elements: “Within this body of mine there is the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element, and the consciousness element.”

In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. A monk contemplates a corpse dead for one, or two, or up to six or seven days, that is being pecked at by crows, devoured by jackals and wolves, burned by fire, or buried in the earth,^102 or [a corpse] that is completely rotten and decomposed. Seeing this, he compares himself to [the corpse]: “This pres- ent body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. Just as he has previously seen [a corpse] in a charnel ground, a monk [recollects] a carcass of bluish color, decomposed and half eaten [by animals], with the bones lying on the ground still connected together. Seeing this, he compares himself to [the corpse]: “This present body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. Just as he has previously seen [a skeleton] in a charnel ground, a monk [recollects it] without skin, flesh, or blood, held together only by sinews. Seeing this,

he compares himself to [the skeleton]: “This present body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. Just as he has previously seen [bones] in a charnel ground, a monk [recollects] disconnected bones scattered in all directions: foot bones, shin bones, thigh bones, a hip bone, vertebrae, shoulder bones, neck bones, a skull, all in different places. Seeing this, he compares his own body to [the bones]: “This present body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body. Again, a monk cultivates mindfulness of the body [as follows]. Just as he has previously seen [bones] in a charnel ground, a monk [recollects] bones that are white like shells, or bluish like the color of a pigeon, or red as if smeared with blood, rotting and decomposing, crumbling into dust. Seeing this, he compares his own body to [the bones]: “This present body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk, however he acts with his body, he knows it as [described] above, as it really is. In this way, dwelling in a secluded spot, with a mind free from indolence, practicing energetically, he removes any defilements from the mind and attains samādhi of the mind. Having attained samādhi of the mind, he knows [the body] as [described] above, as it really is. This is how a monk cultivates mind fulness of the body.

If mindfulness of the body is cultivated like this, made much of like this, then all wholesome states—that is, states that pertain to awakening ( _bodhipakkhiya_ )—are comprised in it. Whatever state of mind he has resolved [to attain] reaches completion. It is comparable to the great ocean: all small rivers are ultimately contained in the ocean. If mindfulness of the body is cultivated like this, made much of it like this, then all wholesome states are comprised in it, that is, the states that pertain to awakening. If there are renunciants and brahmins who have not properly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a narrow mind, then Māra, the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will certainly get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins lack mindfulness of the body.^103 It is just as if there is an empty waterpot placed firmly upright on the ground, and someone brings water and pours it into the pot. What do you think, monks: under these circumstances, would the pot accommodate the water?

The monks replied:

World-honored One, it would accommodate it. Why is that? Because [the pot] is empty, without water, and standing firmly upright on the ground, it will certainly accommodate [the water].

[The Buddha said:]

In the same way, if there are renunciants and brahmins who have not prop- erly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a narrow mind, then Māra, the Evil One, in seeking an opportunity with them, will certainly get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins lack mind- fulness of the body. If there are renunciants and brahmins who have properly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a boundless mind, then Māra, the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will in the end not get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins do not lack mindfulness of the body. It is just as if there were a water pot full of water, placed firmly upright on the ground, and someone brings water and pours it into the pot. What

do you think, monks, under these circumstances, would the pot accom modate [more] water? The monks replied: World-honored One, it would not. Why is that? Because [the pot] is [already] full of water, standing firmly upright on the ground, so it will certainly not accommodate [any more water]. [The Buddha said:] In the same way, if there are renunciants and brahmins who have properly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a boundless mind, then Māra, the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will in the end not get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins do not lack mindfulness of the body. If there are renunciants and brahmins who have not properly estab lished mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a narrow mind, then Māra, the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will certainly get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins lack mind fulness of the body. It is just as if a strong man were to throw a big heavy stone at a mass of wet mud. What do you think, monks, would [the stone] penetrate the mud? The monks replied: [The stone] would penetrated [the mud], World-honored One. Why is that? The mud is wet and the stone is heavy; therefore [the stone] will certainly penetrated [the mud]. [The Buddha said:] In the same way, if there are renunciants and brahmins who have not prop erly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a narrow mind, then Māra, the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will cer tainly get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins lack mindfulness of the body.

If there are renunciants and brahmins who have properly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a boundless mind, then Māra, the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will in the end not get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins do not lack mindfulness of the body. It is just as if a strong man were to throw a light ball made of hair at a straight door. What do you think, monks, would [the ball of hair] penetrate [the door]? The monks replied: The [ball of hair] would not penetrate [the door], World-honored One. Why is that? The ball made of hair is light and malleable, while the door is standing straight,^104 therefore [the ball of hair] will certainly not penetrate [the door]. The Buddha said: In the same way, if there are renunciants and brahmins who have properly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a boundless mind, then Māra, the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will in the end not get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins do not lack mindfulness of the body. If there are renunciants and brahmins who have not properly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a narrow mind, then Māra the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will certainly get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins lack mindfulness of the body. It is just as if someone who needed to make a fire used a piece of dry wood as a base and to drill it with a dry drill. What do you think, monks, would that person get fire in this way? The monks replied, “He would get [fire], World-honored One. Why is that? Because he uses a dry drill to drill that dry wood base, he will certainly get [fire].” [The Buddha said:] In the same way, if there are renunciants and brahmins who have not prop- erly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a narrow mind,

then Māra the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will certainly get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins lack mind fulness of the body. If there are renunciants and brahmins who have properly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a boundless mind, then Māra, the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will in the end not get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins do not lack mindfulness of the body. It is just as if someone needing fire used moist wood as a base and drilled it with a moist drill. What do you think, monks, would that person get fire in this way? The monks replied, “He will not get [fire], World-honored One. Why is that? Because he used a moist drill to drill moist wood, he will not get [fire].” [The Buddha said:] In the same way, if there are renunciants and brahmins who have properly established mindfulness of the body, who dwell with a boundless mind, then Māra, the Evil One, on seeking an opportunity with them, will in the end not get it. Why is that? Because those renunciants and brahmins do not lack mindfulness of the body.^105 Cultivating mindfulness of the body like this, making much of it like this, should be understood to bring eighteen benefits.^106 What are the eight een? A monk is able to bear hunger and thirst, cold and heat, mosquitoes, gadflies, flies, fleas, being assailed by wind and sun, being verbally abused, and being beaten with sticks—he is able to endure [all of this]. [Even if] his body suffers disease causing such extreme pain that his life is coming to an end—whatever is unpleasant, he is able to endure it all. This is reck oned the first benefit of cultivating mindfulness of the body like this, mak ing much of it like this. Again, a monk is able to tolerate discontent; if discontent arises his mind does not become stuck in it. This is reckoned the second benefit of cultivating mindfulness of the body like this, making much of it like this. Again, a monk is able to tolerate fear; if fear arises his mind does not become stuck in it. This is reckoned the third benefit of cultivating mind fulness of the body like this, making much of it like this.

Again, in a monk the three [kinds of] unwholesome thoughts may arise—thoughts of desire, thoughts of anger, and thoughts of harming. If these three [kinds of] unwholesome thoughts arise, his mind does not become stuck in them. This is reckoned the fourth benefit of cultivating mindfulness of the body like this, making much of it like this.^107 Again a monk, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states,... up to dwells having attained the fourth absorption. This is reckoned the fifth,... up to the eighth benefit of cultivating mind- fulness of the body like this, making much of it like this.^108 Again, a monk, through the elimination of three fetters, attains stream- entry. He will not fall into evil conditions and is assured of progress toward full awakening within at most seven more existences. Having gone through seven more existences [at most] in the heavenly or human realms,^109 he will attain the end of _dukkha._ This is reckoned the ninth benefit of culti- vating mindfulness of the body like this, making much of it like this. Again, a monk who has eliminated the three fetters reduces sensual passion, anger, and ignorance, and attains once-returning. Having passed through one more existence in a heavenly or human realm, he will attain the end of _dukkha._ This is reckoned the tenth benefit of cultivating mind- fulness of the body like this, making much of it like this. Again, a monk who has eliminated the five lower fetters will be reborn in another realm and there attain final nirvana, having attained the condition of nonreturning, not coming back to this world. This is reckoned the eleventh benefit of cultivating mindfulness of the body like this, making much of it like this. Again, a monk attains the peaceful liberations that transcend form, having attained the formless, and with the appropriate samādhi dwells having directly realized them. This is reckoned the twelfth benefit of cul- tivating mindfulness of the body like this,^110 making much of it like this. Again, a monk acquires the supernormal powers, the divine ear, the knowledge of others’ minds, the knowledge of former lives, and the knowl- edge of the birth and death [of beings]. [These are reckoned the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth benefits.] [Again, a monk,] by employing wisdom and insight, understands the taints and eradicates them. Through having eradicated all the taints, he

attains the taintless liberation of the mind and liberation by wisdom, know ing and realizing it by himself here and now; and he dwells having per sonally realized, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence!” This is reckoned the eighteenth benefit of cultivating mindfulness of the body like this, making much of it like this. Cultivating mindfulness of the body like this, making much of it like this, should be understood to bring these eighteen benefits. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma81-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA12.1]], [[MA31]], [[MA98]] | M i 256 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DA25]], [[SN35.120]], [[DN2]], [[DN3]], [[DN4]], [[DN5]], [[DN6]], [[DN7]], [[DN9]], [[DN10]], [[DN11]], [[DN12]], [[DN13]], [[MN27]], [[MN38]], [[MN51]], [[MN53]], [[MN60]], [[MN76]], [[MN79]], [[MN94]], [[MN101]], [[MN107]], [[MN112]], [[AN4.14]], [[AN4.165]], [[AN4.198]], [[AN5.76]], [[AN5.140]], [[AN10.99]], [[AN11.17]], [[MN39]], [[SN35.127]], [[SN35.240]], [[AN3.16]], [[AN4.37]], [[MN33]], [[SN42.12]], [[DN25]], [[MN12]], [[MN45]], [[AN3.156-162]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DN22]], [[MN10]], [[MN118]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA81]]
> ◄  [[ma80-bdk]] 📜  [[ma82-bdk]] ►
