---
sutta_code: "MA82"
sutta_title:
  - "支離彌梨 "
  - "Hearing the Sound of] Crickets"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA82]]
> ◄  [[ma81-bdk]] 📜  [[ma83-bdk]] ►

### 82. The Discourse on [Hearing the Sound of] Crickets

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove in the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. At that time, after the midday meal, many monks were sitting together in the assembly hall for some small matter. They wished to settle a matter of disagreement, namely, to discuss the Dharma and discipline, the teachings of the Buddha. At that time the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta was among the assembly. Then, while many of the monks were discussing the Dharma and the discipline, the teachings of the Buddha, the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta kept interrupting without waiting until those monks had finished what they were saying about the Dharma, being disrespectful and inconsiderately ques- tioning those highly regarded elder monks. At that time Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita was among the assembly. Then Ven- erable Mahākoṭṭhita said to the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta: Venerable friend, you should know that when many monks are talking about the Dharma and discipline, the teachings of the Buddha, you should not interrupt. Only if the monks have completed what they have to say can you speak. You should be respectful and considerate in questioning the highly regarded elder monks. Do not be disrespectful or inconsiderate in questioning highly regarded elder monks.”

At that time all the close friends of the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta were among the assembly. Then the friends of the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta said to Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita:

Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita, you should not strongly reprimand the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta. Why is that? The monk Citta Hatthisāriputta is vir- tuous and learned. He may appear to be indolent but he is not conceited. Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita, the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta is capable of assisting the other monks from time to time [in their discussions]. At this the venerable Mahākoṭṭhita said to the close friends of the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta:

Venerable friends, one who does not possess the knowledge of the minds of others cannot arbitrarily declare who is right or wrong. Why is that? There may be a person who, when he is in the presence of the World-honored One and highly regarded elder companions in the holy life, acts with humility, with an endearing and reverential manner, well restrained and well controlled. At a later time, however, when he has left the presence of the World-honored One and the highly regarded elder companions in the holy life, he no longer acts with humility and with an endearing and reverential manner. He associates much with laypeople,^112 makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of bois terous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and mind being pas sionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, [such a monk] is just like an ox that has entered another’s field. The guardian of the field catches it and ties it up with a rope or puts it inside a fence. Venerable friends, if someone were to say, “This ox will not again enter another’s field,” would that be correctly spoken? They replied: No. Why is that? That ox might break or undo the rope with which it is bound, or it might break or get out of the fence within which it is kept and again enter another’s field, just as before.

[Mahākoṭṭhita said:] [In the same way,] venerable friends, there may be a person who, when he is in the presence of the World-honored One and highly regarded elder companions in the holy life, acts with humility, with an endearing and reverential manner, well restrained and well controlled. At a later time, however, when he has left the presence of the World-honored One and the highly regarded elder companions in the holy life, he no longer acts with humility and with an endearing and reverential manner. He associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and mind being passionate, he aban dons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, this is one type of person. Again, venerable friends, there may be a person who attains the first absorption. Having attained the first absorption, he remains satisfied with that and does not strive further, wishing to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he asso ciates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, it is just like when there is a great rain and the village pond becomes full of water. Earlier one could see [in that pond] sand, stones, vegetation, beetles, fish, turtles, toads, and all kinds of water dwelling creatures, as they went back and forth, moved about or remained still. Afterwards, when [the pond] is full of water, one can no longer see them. Venerable friends, if someone were to say, “In this village pond one will never again see sand, stones, vegetation, beetles, fish, turtles, toads, and all kinds of water-dwelling creatures as they go back and forth, move about, or remain still,” would that be correctly spoken?^113

They replied:

No. Why is that? Elephants might drink from the pond; horses, camels, cows, donkeys, pigs, deer, or water buffalo might drink water from it. People might take water from it for their use, the wind might blow on it and the sun might dry it up. Even if one did not previously see [in that pond] sand, stones, vegetation, beetles, fish, turtles, toads, and all kinds of water-dwelling creatures, as they went back and forth, moved about or remained still, later, when the water has become diminished, one sees them again, just as before.

[Mahākoṭṭhita said:]

In the same way, venerable friends, there may be a person who attains the first absorption. Having attained the first absorption, he remains satisfied with that and does not strive further with a wish to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time, he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, this is one type of person. Again, venerable friends, there may be a person who attains the second absorption. Having attained the second absorption, he remains satisfied with that and does not strive further with a wish to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time, he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, it is just like during a time of much rain, all of the dust at a crossroads becomes muddy.^114 Venerable friends, if someone

were to say, “The mud at this crossroads will never dry out and will not become dust again,” would that be correctly spoken? They replied: No. Why is that? Elephants may walk on this crossroads, or horses, camels, cows, donkeys, pigs, deer, water buffalo, or people may walk on this cross roads; the wind may blow on it or the sun may dry it out. [Once] the mud at the crossroads has dried out, it will again become dust.” [Mahākoṭṭhita said:] In the same way, venerable friends, there may be a person who attains the second absorption. Having attained the second absorption, he remains sat isfied with that and does not strive further with a wish to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time, he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, this is one type of person. Again, venerable friends, there may be a person who attains the third absorption. Having attained the third absorption, he remains satisfied with that and does not strive further with a wish to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time, he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he asso ciates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, it is just like a lake [fed by] water from a mountain spring, which is clear and pure, with level shores, still, without fluctuation and without waves. Venerable friends, if someone were to say, “That lake

[fed by] water from a mountain spring will never again fluctuate and will not [again] have any waves,” would that be correctly spoken?^115

They replied:

No. Why is that? A great wind may suddenly come from the eastern direc- tion and blow on [surface of the] the water of that lake, stirring up waves. In the same way, a great wind may suddenly come from the southern direction, from the western direction, or from the northern direction and blow on the [surface of the] water of that lake, stirring up waves.

[Mahākoṭṭhita said:]

In the same way, venerable friends, there may be a person who attains the third absorption. Having attained the third absorption, he remains satisfied with that and does not strive further with a wish to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time, he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, this is one type of person. Again, venerable friends, there may be a person who attains the fourth absorption. Having attained the fourth absorption, he remains satisfied with that and does not strive further with a wish to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time, he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, it is just like when a householder or a householder’s son eats delicious food until he has had his fill. Earlier he wanted to eat

but now he no longer wishes to eat any more.^116 Venerable friends, if some one were to say, “That householder or householder’s son will never again want to get food,” would that be correctly spoken? They replied: No. Why is that? That householder or householder’s son will become hun gry again overnight. [Even] if he earlier had no more use for food [having just eaten], later he will again want to get some. [Mahākoṭṭhita said:] In the same way, venerable friends, there may be a person who attains the fourth absorption. Having attained the fourth absorption, he remains sat isfied with that and does not strive further with a wish to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time, he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, this is one type of person. Again, venerable friends, there may be a person who attains the signless samādhi of the mind ( animitta cetosamādhi ). Having attained the signless samādhi of the mind, he remains satisfied with that and does not strive further with a wish to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time, he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, it is just as when in a forest one may hear the sound of crickets. If the king or the king’s senior ministers were to stay overnight in that forest, there would be the sound of elephants, horses, chariots,

people walking, conchs, drums, narrow drums, side drums, dancing, singing, lutes, drinking, and eating. The sound of the crickets that could earlier be heard would no longer be audible. Venerable friends, if one were to say, “In this forest one will never again hear the sound of crickets,” would that be correctly spoken? They replied: No. Why is that? Having stayed overnight, at dawn the king and the king’s senior ministers will all return to their [respective] place. The sounds that one could hear of the elephants, horses, chariots, people walking, conchs, drums, narrow drums, side drums, dancing, singing, lutes, drinking, and eating, because of which one could not hear the sound of crickets, will have disappeared and one will hear [the crickets] again, just as earlier. [Mahākoṭṭhita said:] In the same way, venerable friends, [there may be a person who] attains the signless samādhi of the mind. Having attained the signless con- centration of the mind, he remains satisfied with that and does not strive further with a wish to attain what has not yet been attained, to gain what has not been gained, to realize what has not been realized. At a later time, he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk. As he associates much with laypeople, makes fun, is conceited, and engages in various kinds of boisterous talk, desire arises in his mind. Desire having arisen in his mind, the body and the mind become passionate. The body and the mind being passionate, he abandons the moral precepts and stops [practicing] the path. Venerable friends, this is one type of person. Then, not long after that, the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta abandoned the moral precepts and stopped [practicing] the path. The close friends of the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta, having heard that the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta had abandoned the moral precepts and stopped [practicing] the path, approached Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita. Having approached him, they said:

Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita, did you have knowledge of the mind of the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta or did your know it in some other way? Why is that?

The monk Citta Hatthisāriputta has just abandoned the moral precepts and stopped [practicing] the path. Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita said to the close friends [of the monk Citta Hatthisāriputta]: Venerable friends, it was bound to happen just like this. Why is that? Because [Citta Hatthisāriputta] did not know [things] as they really are, did not see [things] as they really are. Why is that? It is just because of not knowing things as they really are, not seeing [things] as they really are.^117 Thus spoke the Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita. Having heard what Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma82-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN11.15]], [[THAG17]].2, [[JA355]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA82]]
> ◄  [[ma81-bdk]] 📜  [[ma83-bdk]] ►
