---
sutta_code: "MA83"
sutta_title:
  - "長老上尊睡眠 "
  - "Drowsiness of a Highly Regarded Elder"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA83]]
> ◄  [[ma82-bdk]] 📜  [[ma84-bdk]] ►

### 83. The Discourse on the Drowsiness of a Highly Regarded Elder

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha, who was dwelling among the Bhaggas, was staying on Crocodile Hill in the Deer Park at Bhesakaḷā Grove. At that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, who was dwelling in the country of Magadha, was staying in the village of Kallavāḷamutta. Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, while sitting in meditation in a secluded and quiet place, was drowsing off. The World-honored One realized from afar that Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, sitting in meditation in a secluded and quiet place, was drowsing off. Having realized this, the World-honored One entered an appro- priate samādhi such that, by means of this appropriate samādhi, just as [easily and swiftly] a strong man might bend or stretch his arm, he disappeared from the Deer Park at Bhesakaḷā Grove on Crocodile Hill among the Bhaggas and appeared before Venerable Mahāmoggallāna in the village of Kallavāḷamutta in the country of Magadha. Then the World-honored One emerged from [the state of] samādhi and said, “Mahāmoggallāna, you are stuck in drowsiness. Mahāmoggallāna, you are stuck in drowsiness.” Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said to the World-honored One, “Yes, indeed, World-honored One.” The Buddha said further:

Mahāmoggallāna, whatever [meditation] sign ( _nimitta_ ) makes you become stuck in drowsiness, do not develop that sign, do not make much of it. In this way the drowsiness may be overcome. If for some reason your drowsiness is not overcome, Mahāmoggallāna, you should recite in full the teachings as you have previously heard and memorized them. In this way the drowsiness may be overcome. If for some reason your drowsiness is not overcome, Mahāmoggallāna, you should explain in full to others the teachings as you have previously heard and memorized them. In this way the drowsiness may be overcome. If for some reason your drowsiness has not been overcome, Mahāmog- gallāna, you should ponder and reflect in your mind on the teachings as you have previously heard them and memorized them. In this way the drowsiness may be overcome.^119 If for some reason your drowsiness has not been overcome, Mahā - moggallāna, you should pull on your earlobes with both hands. In this way the drowsiness may be overcome. If for some reason your drowsiness is not overcome, Mahāmoggallāna, you should bathe your face and eyes with cold water and sprinkle your body with it. In this way the drowsiness may be overcome. If for some reason your drowsiness is not overcome, Mahāmoggallāna, you should go out of the dwelling, look to the four directions and gaze up at the constellations. In this way the drowsiness may be overcome.^120 If for some reason your drowsiness is not overcome, Mahāmoggallāna, you should go out of the dwelling, go in front of it, and practice walking meditation out in the open, with your sense faculties guarded and the mind quietly established within, being perceptive of what is in front and behind. In this way the drowsiness may be overcome. If for some reason your drowsiness is not overcome, Mahāmoggallāna, you should leave off walking meditation, go to the end of the meditation path, spread your sitting mat, and sit down cross-legged. In this way the drowsiness may be overcome.^121 If for some reason your drowsiness is not overcome, Mahāmoggallāna, you should go back into the dwelling, fold your outer robe into four and spread it on the bed, fold the inner robe to use as a pillow, and lie down on your right side, one foot on the other, arousing the perception of light

in the mind, establishing right mindfulness and right comprehension, con stantly with the thought of rising again.^122 Mahāmoggallāna, do not indulge in reclining peacefully in bed. Do not desire gain. Do not be attached to fame. Why is that? I shall tell you all the conditions with which one should not associate and I shall tell you [the conditions with which] one should associate.^123 Mahāmoggallāna, what are the conditions of which I say one should not associate with? Mahāmoggallāna, close association with conditions of the common worldly way: I say, that one should not associate with such conditions. Mahāmog gallāna, by close association with conditions of the common worldly way there will be much talk. If there is much talk, there is agitation. If there is agitation, the mind is not at ease. Mahāmoggallāna, if the mind is not at ease, then the mind is bereft of samādhi. For this reason, Mahā moggallāna, I say that one should not associate with these. Mahāmoggallāna, what are the conditions of which I say one should associate with? Mahāmoggallāna, secluded places: I say that one should associate with these conditions. Beneath trees in mountain forests, empty and peaceful places, high crags and rocky caves without noise, remote places free of evil, free of people, places conducive to meditation: Mahā moggallāna, I say that one should associate with these conditions. Mahāmoggallāna, if you enter the village to beg for almsfood, you should do so [with a mind] disenchanted with gain, disenchanted with offerings and homage. Only when your mind has become disenchanted with gain, offerings, and homage should you enter the village to beg for almsfood. Mahāmoggallāna, do not enter the village to beg for almsfood with a proud state of mind. Why is that? Householder families are busy with domestic affairs and when a monk comes begging for almsfood, a householder may not pay attention to him. Then the monk thinks, “Who has spoiled my [relationship] with the householder in this house? Why is that? When I enter the householder’s house, the householder does not pay attention [to me].” Because of this sadness arises; because of sadness there is agitation; because of agitation the mind is not at ease; and because the mind is not at ease, the mind is bereft of samādhi. Mahāmoggallāna, when you teach the Dharma, do not speak in a dis putatious way. If there is disputation, there will be much talk. Because of

much talk, agitation arises; because of agitation, the mind is not at ease; and because the mind is not at ease, the mind is bereft of samādhi. Mahāmoggallāna, when you teach the Dharma, do not be forceful but teach the Dharma [unperturbed,] like a lion. Mahāmoggallāna, when you teach the Dharma, teach it humbly; abandon force, extinguish force, destroy force. Teach the Dharma without being forceful, teach the Dharma [unperturbed,] like a lion. Mahāmoggallāna, you should train like this. At that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna rose from his seat, arranged his robe to bare one shoulder, extended his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said, “World-honored One, how does a monk attain the ultimate, the ulti- mate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate completion of the holy life?” The World-honored One said:^124 Mahāmoggallāna, if a monk experiences pleasant feelings, painful feelings, or neutral feelings, he contemplates these feelings as impermanent, he contemplates their rise and fall, their eradication, their fading away, their cessation, and their abandonment. Having contemplated feelings as imper- manent, having contemplated their rise and fall, their eradication, their fading away, their cessation, and their abandonment, he does not cling to this world; because of not clinging to the world, he is not wearied; because of not being wearied, he attains final nirvana and he knows as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done. There will not be another experiencing of existence.” Mahāmoggallāna, in this way a monk attains the ultimate, the ultimate purity, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate completion of the holy life. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma83-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA19.3]] |  |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA83]]
> ◄  [[ma82-bdk]] 📜  [[ma84-bdk]] ►
