---
sutta_code: "MA86"
sutta_title:
  - "說處 "
  - "Bases"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA86]]
> ◄  [[ma85-bdk]] 📜  [[ma87-bdk]] ►

### 86. The Discourse Explaining the Bases

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park. At that time Venerable Ānanda rose from sitting in meditation in the after- noon and, leading a company of young monks, approached the Buddha. He paid homage at the Buddha’s feet and stood back to one side. The young monks also paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, stepped back, and sat to one side. Venerable Ānanda said, “World-honored One, how should I teach these young monks? How should I instruct them? How should I explain the Dharma to them?” The World-honored One said: Ānanda, you should explain to these young monks the bases ( _āyatana_ ), you should teach them the bases. If you explain to these young monks the bases, if you teach them the bases, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Venerable Ānanda extended his hands with palms joined toward the Buddha and said:

World-honored One, now is the right time. Well-gone One, now is the right time. If the World-honored One would explain to the young monks the bases, teach them the bases, then I and the young monks, having heard it from the World-honored One, will remember it well. The World-honored One said, “Ānanda, listen closely and pay careful attention! I shall explain it in full to you and the young monks.” Venerable Ānanda and the others listened to receive instruction. The World-honored One said: Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the five aggregates of clinging: the aggregate of clinging of form,... of feeling,... of perception,... of formations, and the aggregate of clinging of consciousness. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these five aggregates of clinging to the young monks. If you explain and teach these five aggregates of clinging to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the six internal sense spheres: the sense base of the eye,... of the ear,... of the nose,... of the tongue,... of the body, and the sense base of the mind. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these six internal sense spheres to the young monks. If you explain and teach these six internal sense spheres to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the six external sense spheres: the sense base of form, of sounds, of odors, of tastes, of tangibles, and the sense base of mental objects. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these six external sense spheres to the young monks. If you explain and teach these six external sense spheres to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the six types of consciousness: eye consciousness, ear,... nose,... tongue,... body,... and mind consciousness. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these six types

of consciousness to the young monks. If you explain and teach these six types of consciousness to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the six types of contact: contact [related to] the eye,... the ear,... the nose,... the tongue,... the body, and contact [related to] the mind. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these six types of contact to the young monks. If you explain and teach these six types of contact to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the six types of feeling: feeling [related to] the eye,... the ear,... the nose,... the tongue,... the body, and feeling [related to] the mind. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these six types of feeling to the young monks. If you explain and teach these six types of feeling to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the six types of perception: per ception [related to] the eye,... the ear,... the nose,... the tongue,... the body, and perception [related to] the mind. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these six types of perception to the young monks. If you explain and teach these six types of perception to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the six types of intention: intention [related to] the eye,... the ear,... the nose,... the tongue,... the body, and intention [related to] the mind. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these six types of intention to the young monks. If you explain and teach these six types of intention to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the six types of craving: craving [related to] the eye,... the ear,... the nose,... the tongue,... the body,

and craving [related to] the mind. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these six types of craving to the young monks. If you explain and teach these six types of craving to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the six elements: the earth ele- ment,... water,... fire,... wind,... space, and the consciousness element. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these six elements to the young monks. If you explain and teach these six elements to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and hap- piness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you dependent arising and things that are dependently arisen: This being, that comes to be; this not being, that does not come to be. With the arising of this, that arises; with the ces- sation of this, that ceases. Conditioned by ignorance there are formations, conditioned by formations there is consciousness, conditioned by con- sciousness there is name-and-form, conditioned by name-and-form there are the six sense spheres, conditioned by the six sense spheres there is contact, conditioned by contact there is feeling, conditioned by feeling there is craving, conditioned by craving there is clinging, conditioned by clinging there is becoming, conditioned by becoming there is birth, con- ditioned by birth there is old age and death. With the cessation of ignorance formations cease, with the cessation of formations consciousness ceases, with the cessation of consciousness name-and-form ceases, with the cessation of name-and-form the six sense spheres cease, with the cessation of the six sense spheres contact ceases, with the cessation of contact feeling ceases, with the cessation of feeling craving ceases, with the cessation of craving clinging ceases, with the cessation of clinging becoming ceases, with the cessation of becoming birth ceases, with the cessation of birth old age and death cease. Ānanda, you should explain and teach dependent arising and things that are dependently arisen to the young monks. If you explain and teach dependent arising and things that are dependently arisen to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness,

they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the four establishments of mind fulness: contemplating the body as body, contemplating feeling,... mental states,... dharmas as dharmas. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these four establishments of mindfulness to the young monks. If you explain and teach these four establishments of mindfulness to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and hap piness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the four right efforts: A monk arouses zeal, puts forth exertion, develops energy, and generates mental effort for the elimination of already arisen evil and unwholesome states. He arouses zeal, puts forth exertion, develops energy, and generates mental effort for the nonarising of not yet arisen evil and unwholesome states. He arouses zeal, puts forth exertion, develops energy, and generates mental effort for the arising of not yet arisen wholesome states. He arouses zeal, puts forth exertion, develops energy, and generates mental effort for the maintaining of already arisen wholesome states, for not forgetting them, for not regressing, for their increase, for making much of them, for their fulfillment. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these four right efforts to the young monks. If you explain and teach these four right efforts to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and hap piness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the four bases of supernormal power: A monk develops a basis of supernormal power by achieving con centration through zeal accompanied by formations of striving, in depend ence on dispassion, in dependence on separation, in dependence on ces sation, not wishing for anything. In the same way,... samādhi through effort,... samādhi through the mind,.... [A monk] develops a basis of supernormal power by achieving con centration through investigation accompanied by formations of striving,

in dependence on dispassion, in dependence on separation, in dependence on cessation, not wishing for anything. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these four bases of supernormal power to the young monks. If you explain and teach these four bases of supernormal power to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the four absorptions: Secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, a monk,... up to... dwells having attained the fourth absorption. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these four absorptions to the young monks. If you explain and teach these four absorptions to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the Four Noble Truths: the noble truth of _dukkha,_ the noble truth of its arising, the noble truth of its cessation, the noble truth of the path to its cessation. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these Four Noble Truths to the young monks. If you explain and teach these Four Noble Truths to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you four perceptions: A monk has a narrow perception, a great perception, an immeasurable perception, or a perception of nothingness. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these four perceptions to the young monks. If you explain and teach these four perceptions to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and hap- piness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the four immeasurables: With a mind imbued with loving-kindness, a monk dwells pervading one direc- tion, likewise the second, third, and fourth directions, and also the four intermediate directions, above, and below, all around, everywhere. With

a mind imbued with loving-kindness, free from fetters or resentment, without ill-will or quarreling, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind] that is boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well-cultivated. In the same way, compassion,... empathetic joy,... equanimity. Free from fetters or resentment, without ill-will or quarreling, he dwells pervading the entire world [with a mind] that is boundless, exalted, immeasurable, and well-cultivated. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these four immeasurables to the young monks. If you explain and teach these four immeasurables to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the four formless [attainments]: By completely transcending perception of form, a monk,... up to... dwells having attained the sphere of neither-perception-nor-nonperception. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these four formless [attainments] to the young monks. If you explain and teach these four formless [attain ments] to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the four noble traditions ( ariyavaṃsa ): A monk or a nun knows to be contented with coarse and simple robes and is not mentally preoccupied with seeking robes. If they do not receive robes they are not worried, do not weep, do not beat their breast, and are not bewildered. If they do receive robes, they are not defiled, not attached, not desirous, not greedy, not affected, and do not think about them. They make use of robes seeing the danger in them and knowing the escape from them. If they are not indolent regarding the ben efits of this practice [of using robes] and have right comprehension, they are reckoned a monk or nun who is properly established in the ancient noble tradition. In the same way, food,... dwelling places,.... They wish to eradicate [unwholesome mental states], delighting in eradication; they wish to cultivate [wholesome states], delighting in cul tivation. They do not praise themselves or look down on others on account of having that wish to eradicate, that delight in eradication, that wish to

cultivate, that delight in cultivation. If they are not indolent regarding the benefits of this practice [of eradication and cultivation] and have right comprehension, they are reckoned a monk or a nun who is properly estab- lished in the ancient noble tradition. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these four noble traditions to the young monks. If you explain and teach these four noble traditions to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the four fruits of a renunciant: stream-entry, once-returning, nonreturning, and the supreme fruit of ara- hantship. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these four fruits of a renunciant to the young monks. If you explain and teach these four fruits of a renun- ciant to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the five perceptions ripening in liberation: the perception of impermanence, the perception of _dukkha_ [in what is] impermanent, the perception of not-self [in what is] _dukkha,_ the perception of impurity and foulness, and the perception of not delighting in the entire world. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these five perceptions ripening in liberation to the young monks. If you explain and teach these five per- ceptions ripening in liberation to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the five bases of liberation, due to which monks and nuns can attain liberation of the not yet liberated mind, can attain remainderless destruction of the taints not yet destroyed, and can attain the unsurpassable nirvana not yet attained. What are the five? Ānanda, the World-honored One teaches the Dharma to the monks and nuns, or knowledgeable companions in the holy life teach the Dharma to the monks and nuns.

Ānanda, when the World-honored One teaches the Dharma to the monks and nuns or knowledgeable companions in the holy life teach the Dharma to the monks and nuns, then, on hearing the Dharma, [the monks and nuns] come to know the Dharma and understand its meaning. Because of coming to know the Dharma and understand its meaning, they get delight. Because of delight, they get joy. Because of joy, they get tranquility of the body. Because of tranquility of the body, they feel happiness. Because of feeling happiness, they get samādhi of the mind. Ānanda, because the mind is collected, monks and nuns get to see as it really is, to know as it really is. Because of seeing as it really is, know ing as it really is, they get disenchantment. Because of disenchantment, they get dispassion. Because of dispassion, they attain liberation. Because of liberation, they attain knowledge of liberation, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Ānanda, this is called the first basis of liberation, due to which monks and nuns can attain liberation of the not yet liberated mind, can attain remainderless destruction of the taints not yet destroyed, and can attain the unsurpassable nirvana not yet attained. Again, Ānanda, [it may be that] the World-honored One does not teach the Dharma to the monks and nuns, nor do knowledgeable com panions in the holy life teach the Dharma to the monks and nuns, but they recite at length the Dharma that they have previously heard and practiced reciting.... It may be that they do not recite at length the Dharma that they have previously heard and practiced reciting, but they teach at length to others the Dharma that they have previously heard and practiced reciting.... It may be that they do not teach at length to others the Dharma that they have previously heard and practiced reciting, but they reflect on and analyze in their minds the Dharma that they have previously heard and practiced reciting.... It may be that they do not reflect on and analyze in their minds the Dharma that they have previously heard and practiced reciting, but they hold well the signs ( nimitta ) for samādhi.

Ānanda, if monks and nuns hold well the signs for samādhi, then they come to know the Dharma and understand its meaning. Because of coming to know the Dharma and to understand its meaning, they get delight. Because of delight, they get joy. Because of joy, they get tranquility of the body. Because of tranquility of the body, they feel happiness. Because of feeling happiness, they get samādhi of the mind. Ānanda, because the mind is collected, monks and nuns get to see as it really is, to know as it really is. Because of seeing as it really is, knowing as it really is, they get disenchantment. Because of disenchant- ment, they get dispassion. Because of dispassion, they attain liberation. Because of liberation, they attain knowledge of liberation, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Ānanda, this is reckoned the fifth basis of liberation, because of which a monk or nun can attain liberation of the not yet liberated mind, can attain remainderless destruction of the taints not yet destroyed, and can attain the unsurpassable nirvana not yet attained. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these five bases of liberation to the young monks. If you explain and teach these five bases of liberation to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the five faculties: the faculty of faith,... of energy,... of mindfulness,... of samādhi, and the faculty of wisdom. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these five faculties to the young monks. If you explain and teach these five faculties to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the five powers: the power of faith,... of energy,... of mindfulness,... of samādhi, and the power of wisdom.

Ānanda, you should explain and teach these five powers to the young monks. If you explain and teach these five powers to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the five elements of release ( nissaraṇa-dhātu ). What are the five? Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates sensual desire thoroughly and well. Because of having con templated sensual desire thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to sensual desire, does not delight in sensual desire, does not approach sensual desire, is not determined on sensual desire. When sensual desire arises in his mind it immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning sensual desire, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in it. He loathes and detests sensual desire. Ānanda, it is just as a chicken feather or a tendon, on being placed in a fire, immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. In the same way, Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates sensual desire thoroughly and well. Because of having contemplated sensual desire thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to sensual desire, does not delight in sensual desire, does not approach sensual desire, is not deter mined on sensual desire. When sensual desire arises in his mind it imme diately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning sensual desire, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in it. He loathes and detests sensual desire. [The noble disciple] contemplates dispassion, his mind inclines to dis passion, delights in dispassion, approaches dispassion, determines on dis passion. His mind is free from obstruction and free from turbidity. His mind gains happiness, is able to attain happiness, being far removed from any sensual desire and from the taints, vexations, and worries that arise because of sensual desire. [His mind] is free of them, liberated from them. Having become free of sensual desire, liberated from it, [the noble dis ciple] no longer experiences this feeling, namely the feeling that arises in dependence on it. Such is release from sensual desire. Ānanda, this is called the first element of release.

Again, Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates ill-will thoroughly and well. Because of having contemplated ill-will thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to ill-will, does not delight in ill-will, does not approach ill-will, is not determined on ill-will. When ill-will arises in his mind, it immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning ill-will, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in it. He loathes and detests ill-will. Ānanda, it is just as a chicken feather or a tendon, on being placed in a fire, immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. In the same way, Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates ill-will thoroughly and well. Because of having contemplated ill-will thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to ill-will, does not delight in ill-will, does not approach ill-will, is not determined on ill-will. When ill-will arises in his mind, it immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning ill-will, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in it. He loathes and detests ill-will. [The noble disciple] contemplates the absence of ill-will, his mind inclines to the absence of ill-will, delights in the absence of ill-will, approaches the absence of ill-will, determines on the absence of ill-will. His mind is free from obstruction and turbidity. His mind gains happiness, is able to attain happiness, being far removed from any ill-will and from the taints, vexations, and worries that arise because of ill-will. [His mind] is free of them, liberated from them. Having become free of ill-will, liberated from it, [the noble disciple] no longer experiences this feeling, namely the feeling that arises in depend- ence on it. Such is release from ill-will. Ānanda, this is called the second element of release. Again, Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates harmfulness thor- oughly and well. Because of having contemplated harmfulness thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to harmfulness, does not delight in harmfulness, does not approach harmfulness, is not determined on harm- fulness. When harmfulness arises in his mind, it immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning harmfulness, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in it. He loathes and detests harmfulness.

Ānanda, it is just as a chicken feather or a tendon, when placed in a fire, immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. In the same way, Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates harmfulness thor oughly and well. Because of having contemplated harmfulness thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to harmfulness, does not delight in harmfulness, does not approach harmfulness, is not determined on harm fulness. When harmfulness arises in his mind, it immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning harmfulness, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in it. He loathes and detests harmfulness. [The noble disciple] contemplates the absence of harmfulness, his mind inclines to the absence of harmfulness, delights in the absence of harm fulness, approaches the absence of harmfulness, determines on the absence of harmfulness. His mind is free from obstruction and turbidity. His mind gains happiness, is able to attain happiness, being far removed from any harmfulness and from the taints, vexations, and worries that arise because of harmfulness. It is free of them, liberated from them. Having become free of harmfulness, liberated from it, [the noble dis ciple] no longer experiences this feeling, namely the feeling that arises in dependence on it. Such is release from harmfulness. Ānanda, this is called the third element of release. Again, Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates form thoroughly and well. Because of having contemplated form thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to form, does not delight in form, does not approach form, is not determined on form. When form arises in his mind, it imme diately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning form, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in it. He loathes and detests form. Ānanda, it is just as a chicken feather or a tendon, on being placed in a fire, immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. In the same way, Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates form thoroughly and well. Because of having contemplated form thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to form, does not delight in form, does not approach form, is not determined on form. When form arises in his mind, it immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning form, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in form. He loathes and detests form.

[The noble disciple] contemplates the formless, his mind inclines to the formless, delights in the formless, approaches the formless, determines on the formless. His mind is free from obstruction and turbidity. His mind gains happiness, is able to attain happiness, being far removed from any form and from the taints, vexations, and worries that arise because of form. It is free of them, liberated from them. Having become free of form, liberated from it, [the noble disciple] no longer experiences this feeling, namely the feeling that arises in dependence on it. Such is release from form. Ānanda, this is called the fourth element of release. Again, Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates the [sense of] identity ( _sakkāya_ ) thoroughly and well. Because of having contemplated the [sense of] identity thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to the [sense of] identity, does not delight in the [sense of] identity, does not approach the [sense of] identity, is not determined on the [sense of] identity. When the [sense of] identity arises in his mind, it immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning the [sense] of identity, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in it. He loathes and detests the [sense of] identity. Ānanda, it is just as a chicken feather or a tendon, on being placed in a fire, immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. In the same way, Ānanda, a learned noble disciple contemplates the [sense of] identity thoroughly and well. Because of having contemplated the [sense of] identity thoroughly and well, his mind does not incline to the [sense of] identity, does not delight in the [sense of] identity, does not approach the [sense of] identity, is not determined on the [sense of] identity. When the [sense of] identity arises in his mind, it immediately melts away and shrivels up, unable to expand again. Abandoning the [sense of] identity, [the noble disciple] does not dwell in it. He loathes and detests the [sense of] identity. [The noble disciple] contemplates the absence of the [sense of] identity, his mind inclines to the absence of the [sense of] identity, delights in the absence of the [sense of] identity, approaches the absence of the [sense of] identity, determines on the absence of the [sense of] identity. His mind is free from obstruction and turbidity. His mind gains happiness, is able

to attain happiness, being far removed from any [sense of] identity and from the taints, vexations, and worries that arise because of the [sense of] identity. It is free of them, liberated from them. Having become free of the [sense of] identity, liberated from it, [the noble disciple] no longer experiences this feeling, namely the feeling that arises in dependence on it. Such is release from the [sense of] identity. Ānanda, this is called the fifth element of release. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these five elements of release to the young monks. If you explain and teach these five elements of release to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you seven types of wealth: the wealth of faith,... of morality,... of conscience,... of shame,... of learning,... of generosity, and the wealth of wisdom. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these seven types of wealth to the young monks. If you explain and teach these seven types of wealth to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you seven powers: the power of faith,... of energy,... of conscience,... of shame,... of mind fulness,... of samādhi, and the power of wisdom. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these seven powers to the young monks. If you explain and teach these seven powers to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the seven factors of awakening: the mindfulness factor of awakening, the investigation of dharmas,... energy,... joy,... tranquility,... samādhi, and the equanimity factor of awakening. Ānanda, you should explain and teach these seven factors of awakening to the young monks. If you explain and teach these seven factors of awak ening to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain

strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have earlier explained to you the noble eightfold path: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right samādhi—these are the eight. Ānanda, you should explain and teach this noble eightfold path to the young monks. If you explain and teach this noble eightfold path to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Then Venerable Ānanda extended his hands with palms joined toward the Buddha and said, “World-honored One, it is exceptional, it is marvelous, how the World-honored One has explained the bases and taught the bases to the young monks.” The World-honored One said: It is like this, Ānanda, it is like this. It is exceptional, it is marvelous, how I have explained the bases and taught the bases to the young monks. Ānanda, if you were to hear about the summit of the Dharma and falling back from the summit of the Dharma from the Tathāgata, then you would have even more faith and delight in regard to the Tathāgata. Then Venerable Ānanda extended his hands with palms joined toward the Buddha and said:

World-honored One, this is the right time. Well-gone One, this is the right time. If the World-honored One would explain and teach the summit of the Dharma and falling back from the summit of the Dharma to the young monks, the young monks and myself, too, on hearing it from the World- honored One, will remember it well. The World-honored One said, “Ānanda, listen closely and pay careful attention! I shall explain to you and the young monks the summit of the Dharma and falling back from the summit of the Dharma.” Venerable Ānanda listened to receive instruction. The World-honored One said:

Ānanda, a learned noble disciple, with a truly reasoning mind, considers and weighs up carefully, contemplates and analyzes impermanence, dukkha, emptiness, and no-self. As he considers like this, weighs up like this, care fully contemplates and analyzes like this, there arises patience, there arises happiness, there arises desire—desire for learning, desire for mindfulness, and desire for contemplation. Ānanda, this is called the summit of the Dharma. Ānanda, if, having attained this summit of the Dharma he loses it again and regresses through not developing and protecting it, not cultivating it energetically, then, Ānanda, this is called falling back from the summit of the Dharma. It the same way, the internal and external [sense spheres],... conscious ness,... contact,... feeling,... perception,... volition,... craving,... the elements,... and dependent arising. Ānanda, a learned noble disciple considers and weighs up dependent arising and things that are dependently arisen, and carefully contemplates and analyzes impermanence, dukkha, emptiness, and no-self. As he considers like this, weighs up like this, carefully contemplates and analyzes like this, there arises patience, there arises hap piness, there arises desire—desire for learning, desire for mindfulness, and desire for contemplation. Ānanda, this is called the summit of the Dharma. Ānanda, if, having attained this summit of the Dharma, he loses it again and regresses through not developing and protecting it, not cultivating it energetically, then, Ānanda, this is called falling back from the summit of the Dharma. Ānanda, you should explain and teach this summit of the Dharma and falling back from the summit of the Dharma to the young monks. If you explain and teach this summit of the Dharma and falling back from the summit of the Dharma to the young monks, they will obtain being at ease, they will obtain strength and happiness, they will be untroubled in body and mind, and they will practice the holy life for as long as they live. Ānanda, I have explained and taught the bases to you all, also the sum mit of the Dharma and falling back from the summit of the Dharma. What a teacher should do for his disciples out of great compassion, mercy, sym pathy, and concern, seeking their benefit and welfare, seeking their safety and happiness, that I have now already done. You too should do your part.

Go and sit in meditation and contemplation in a secluded place, on a mountain, in a forest, at the base of a tree, in an empty and quiet place. Do not be negligent, make diligent effort, lest you regret it later. This is my instruction, this is my teaching. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Ānanda and the young monks were delighted and received it respectfully.

##

## On Blemishes


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma86-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA86]]
> ◄  [[ma85-bdk]] 📜  [[ma87-bdk]] ►
