---
sutta_code: "MA87"
sutta_title:
  - "穢品 "
  - "Defilements"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA87]]
> ◄  [[ma86-bdk]] 📜  [[ma88-bdk]] ►

### 87. The Discourse on Defilements

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the Deer Park of Bhesakalā Grove at Suṃsumāragiri in Bhagga country. At that time, Venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks: Venerable friends, there are four kinds of person in the world. What [are the] four? Here a person actually has a defilement within himself but does not know it; he does not understand as it really is that he has a defilement within himself. Here some person actually has a defilement within himself and knows it; he understands as it really is that he has a defilement within himself. Here some person actually has no defilement within himself but does not know it; he does not understand as it really is that he has no defilement within himself. Here some person actually has no defilement within himself and knows it; he understands as it really is that he has no defilement within himself. Venerable friends, in regard to the person who actually has a defilement within himself but does not know it, who does not understand as it really is that he has a defilement within himself: he is inferior among persons [with a defilement]. In regard to the person who actually has a defilement within himself and knows it, who understands as it really is that he has a defilement within himself: he is superior among persons [with a defile- ment]. In regard to the person who actually has no defilement within him- self but does not know it, who does not understand as it really is that he has no defilement within himself: he is inferior among persons [with no defilement]. In regard to the person who actually has no defilement within himself and knows it, who understands as it really is that he has no defile- ment within himself: he is superior among persons [with no defilement].

Then a certain monk rose from his seat, arranged his robe to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with palms joined toward Venerable Sāriputta, and said:^142 Venerable Sāriputta, what is the cause, what is the condition for saying that, of the two former persons with a defilement, with a defiled mind, one is inferior and one is superior? Again, what is the cause, what is the condition for saying that, of the two latter persons without defilement, with an undefiled mind, one is inferior and one is superior? Then Venerable Sāriputta replied to that monk: Venerable friend, if a person actually has a defilement within himself but does not know it, does not understand as it really is that he has a defilement within himself, then it should be known that he will not be motivated to abandon that defilement. He will not make effort or diligently train [for that purpose], and he will die with defilements, with a defiled mind. Because of dying with defilements, with a defiled mind, that person has an inauspicious death and will be reborn in a bad realm of existence.^143 Why is that? Because he dies with defilements, with a defiled mind. Venerable friend, suppose that a person buys, from a shop or a smithy, a bronze dish that is dirty and stained. Having brought the dish home, he does not frequently wash off the dirt, does not frequently wipe it, does not expose it to sunlight, but puts it away in a dusty place. As a result, that bronze dish becomes even more dirty and stained. In the same manner, venerable friend, if a person actually has a defile ment within himself but does not know it, does not understand as it really is that he has a defilement within himself, then it should be known that he will not be motivated to abandon that defilement. He will not make effort or diligently train [for that purpose], and he will die with defilements, with a defiled mind; he will have an inauspicious death and will be reborn in a bad realm of existence. Why is that? It is because of dying with defile ments, with a defiled mind. Venerable friend, if a person knows as it really is: “I have a defilement within me, I actually have this defilement within me,” then it should be known that this person will be motivated to abandon that defilement. He

will make effort and diligently train [for that purpose], and he will die without defilements, with an undefiled mind. Because of dying without defilements, with an undefiled mind, that person has an auspicious death and will be reborn in a good realm of existence. Why is that? Because he is without defilements, he dies with an undefiled mind. Venerable friend, suppose that a person buys, from a shop or a smithy, a bronze dish that is dirty and stained. Having brought the dish home, he frequently washes off the dirt, frequently wipes it, frequently exposes it to sunlight, and does not put it away in a dusty place. As a result, the bronze dish will become very clean. In the same manner, venerable friend, if person knows as it really is: “I have a defilement within me, I actually have this defilement within me,” then it should be known that this person will be motivated to abandon that defilement. He will make effort and diligently train [for that purpose], and he will die without defilements, with an undefiled mind. He has an auspicious death and will be reborn in a good realm of existence. Why is that? Because of dying without defilements, with an undefiled mind. Venerable friend, if a person does not know as it really is: “I have no defilement within me, I actually do not have this defilement within me,” then it should be known that he will not guard [his mind] against [enticing] things cognized by the eyes or the ears. As a result of not guarding [his mind] against [enticing] things cognized by the eyes or the ears, his mind will become obsessed by desires and he will die with desires, defilements, with a defiled mind. Because of dying with desires, defilements, with a defiled mind, that person has an inauspicious death and will be reborn in a bad realm of existence. Why is that? Because he dies with desires, defile- ments, with a defiled mind. Venerable friend, suppose that a person buys, from a shop or a smithy, a bronze dish that is clean and without stains. Having brought the dish home, he does not frequently wash off any dirt, does not frequently wipe it, and does not frequently expose it to sunlight, but puts it away in a dusty place. As a result, that bronze dish will certainly become dirty and stained. In the same manner, venerable friend, if a person does not know as it really is: “I have no defilement within me, I actually do not have this defilement within me,” then it should be known that he will not guard

[his mind] against [enticing] things cognized by the eyes or the ears. As a result of not guarding [his mind] against [enticing] things cognized by the eyes or the ears, his mind will become obsessed by desires and he will die with desires, defilements, with a defiled mind. Because of dying with desires, defilements, with a defiled mind, that person has an inauspicious death and will be reborn in a bad realm of existence. Why is that? Because he dies with desires, defilements, with a defiled mind. Venerable friend, if a person knows as it really is: “I have no defilement within me, I actually do not have this defilement within me,” then it should be known that he will guard [his mind] against [enticing] things cognized by the eyes or the ears. As a result of guarding [his mind] against [enticing] things cognized by the eyes or the ears, his mind will not become obsessed by desires and he will die without desires, without defilements, with an undefiled mind. Because of dying without desires, without defilements, with an undefiled mind, that person has an auspicious death and will be reborn in a good realm of existence. Why is that? Because he dies without desires, without defilements, with an undefiled mind. Venerable friend, suppose a person buys, from a shop or a smithy, a bronze dish that is clean and without stains. Having brought the dish home, he frequently washes off any dirt, frequently wipes it, frequently exposes it to sunlight, and does not put it away in a dusty place. As a result, that bronze dish will become very clean. In the same manner, venerable friend, if a person knows as it really is: “I have no defilement within me, I actually do not have this defilement within me,” then it should be known that he will guard [his mind] against [enticing] things cognized by the eyes or the ears. As a result of guarding [his mind] against [enticing] things cognized by the eyes or the ears, his mind will not become obsessed by desires and he will die without desires, without defile ments, with an undefiled mind. Because of dying without desires, without defilements, with an undefiled mind, that person has an auspicious death and will be reborn in a good realm of existence. Why is that? Because he dies without desires, without defilements, with an undefiled mind. Venerable friend, this is the cause, this is the condition for saying that of the two former persons with a defilement, with a defiled mind, one is inferior and one is superior. This is the cause, this is the condition for

saying that of the two latter persons with no defilement, with an undefiled mind, one is inferior and one is superior. At this another monk rose from his seat, arranged his robe to bare one shoulder, extended his hands with palms joined toward Venerable Sāriputta, and said, “Venerable Sāriputta, one speaks of ‘defilements.’ What are ‘defile- ments’?” Venerable Sāriputta replied to that monk: Venerable friend, the countless evil and unwholesome states that arise from desires: these are called “defilements.” Why is that? Suppose that a person’s mind gives rise to a desire like this: “I have committed a breach of the pre- cepts. Let others not know that I have committed a breach of the precepts!” Venerable friend, it may be that others do come to know of his breach of the precepts; and because his breach of the precepts becomes known to others his mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose a person’s mind gives rise to a desire like this: “I have committed a breach of the precepts. Let others admonish me in private; let them not admonish me amidst the sangha regarding my breach of the precepts!” Venerable friend, it may be that others admonish that person amidst the sangha rather than in private; and that because he is admonished by others amidst the sangha rather than in private his mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind gives rise to a desire like this: “I have committed a breach of the precepts. Let a person superior to me admonish me; let not a person who is of lower standing than myself admonish me about my breach of the precepts!” Venerable friend, it may be that a person who is of lower standing than himself admonishes him about his breach of the precepts, rather than a person superior to him; and because of being admonished by a person of lower standing than himself rather than by a person superior to him, his mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states].

Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind gives rise to a desire like this: “Let me sit before the Buddha and ask him about the Dharma, [in response to which] the World-honored One explains it to the monks! Let not another monk sit before the Buddha and ask him about the Dharma, [in response to which] the World-honored One explains it to the monks!” Venerable friend, it may be that another monk sits before the Buddha and asks him about the Dharma, [in response to which] the World-honored One explains it to the monks; and because that other monk sat before the Buddha and asked him about the Dharma, [in response to which] the World-honored One explained it to the monks, [that person’s] mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind gives rise to a desire like this: “When the monks enter [the village to beg alms], let me be at the head [of the line of monks], with all of the [remaining] monks following me when we enter! When the monks enter [the village], let not another monk be at the head [of the line], with all of the remaining monks following him as we enter!” Venerable friend, it may be that when the monks enter [the village], another monk is at the head [of the line], with all of the remaining monks following him when they enter; and because when the monks enter [the village] that other monk is at the head with all of the remaining monks following him when they enter, [that person’s] mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind gives rise to a desire like this: “When the monks enter [the refectory], let me get the best seat, be the first to be given a seat, the first to receive water for [hand] washing, and the first to be served food! When the monks enter [the refectory], let not another monk get the best seat, be the first to be given a seat, the first to receive water for [hand] washing, and the first to be served food!” Venerable friend, it may be that when the monks enter [the refectory], another monk gets the best seat, is the first to be given a seat, the first to receive water for [hand] washing, and the first to be served food; and because, when the monks enter [the refectory], that other monk gets the

best seat, is the first to be given a seat, the first to receive water for [hand] washing, and the first to be served food, [that person’s] mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind gives rise to a desire like this: “When the monks have finished their meal, put away their bowls, and washed [their hands], let me be the one to give a teaching to the house- holders, exhorting and inspiring them, fully delighting them! When the monks have finished their meal, put away their bowls, and washed [their hands], let not another monk be the one to give a teaching to the house- holders, exhorting and inspiring them, fully delighting them!’ Venerable friend, it may be that when the monks have finished their meal, put away their bowls, and washed [their hands], another monk gives a teaching to the householders, exhorting and inspiring them, fully delight- ing them; and because when the monks have finished their meal, put away their bowls, and washed [their hands], that other monk gives a teaching to the householders, exhorting and inspiring them, fully delighting them, [that person’s] mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind gives rise to a desire like this: “When householders approach the monastery, let me be the one to meet and accompany them, to sit with them, and to engage in discussion with them! When householders approach the monastery, let not another monk be the one to meet and accompany them, to sit with them and engage in discussion with them!”^144 Venerable friend, it may be that when householders approach the monastery, another monk meets and accompanies them, sits with them and engages in discussion with them; and that because that other monk meets and accompanies the householders when they approach the monastery, sitting with them and engaging in discussion with them, [that person’s] mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind gives rise to a desire like this: “Let me be recognized by the king, the senior ministers, brahmins, and householders, and be respected by the people of the country! Let not

another monk be recognized by the king, the senior ministers, brahmins, and householders, or be respected by the people of the country!”^145 Venerable friend, it may be that another monk is recognized by the king, the senior ministers, brahmins, and householders, and respected by the people of the country; and that because that other monk is recognized by the king, the senior ministers, brahmins, and householders, and is respected by the people of the country, [that person’s] mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person gives rise to a desire like this: “Let me be respected by members of the four assemblies: monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples! Let not another monk be respected by members of the four assemblies: monks, nuns, male lay dis ciples, and female lay disciples!”^146 Venerable friend, it may be that another monk is respected by members of the four assemblies: monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay dis ciples; and that because that other monk is respected by members of the four assemblies: monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples, [that person’s] mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person gives rise to a desire like this: “Let me acquire [excellent] robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and bedding, medicine, all the requisites of life! Let not another monk acquire [excellent] robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and bedding, medicine, all the requisites of life!”^147 Venerable friend, it may be that another monk acquires [excellent] robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and bedding, medicine, all the requisites of life; and that because that other monk acquires [excellent] robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and bedding, all the requisites of life, [that person’s] mind gives rise to evil [thoughts]. Those evil [thoughts] and that desire, if they arise in his mind, are both unwholesome [states]. Venerable friend, so long as his wise companions in the holy life have not come to know of the countless evil and unwholesome mental aspirations that arise in him in this way, that person, [despite] not being a renunciant, is perceived as a renunciant. Not being a wise renunciant, he is perceived

as a wise renunciant. Not [possessing] right comprehension, he is perceived as possessing right comprehension. Not [possessing] right mindfulness, he is perceived as [possessing] right mindfulness. Not purified, he is per- ceived as purified. [But,] venerable friend, when his wise companions in the holy life do come to know of the countless evil and unwholesome mental desires that arise in him in this way, that person, not being a renunciant, is perceived as not a renunciant. Not being a wise renunciant, he is perceived as not a wise renunciant. Not [possessing] right comprehension, he is perceived as not [possessing] right comprehension. Not [possessing] right mindful- ness, he is perceived as not [possessing] right mindfulness. Not purified, he is perceived as not purified.^148 Venerable friend, suppose a person buys, from a shop or a smithy, a bronze dish with a lid. He fills it with feces and puts on the lid.^149 Then he carries it through the market, close to where crowds of people are walking. All of those people who see [the dish] desire to eat [the food they assume it contains]. They experience strong relishing. They have no repugnance toward it, as the perception of purity has arisen in them. Having carried [the dish] to a certain location, he lifts the lid and reveals [its contents]. When the people see what is inside, none of them has any desire to eat it. They no longer experience relishing, [and instead feel] great repugnance, as the perception of impurity has arisen in them. Even those who are hungry no longer want it, let alone those who are not hungry. In the same way, venerable friend, so long as his wise companions in the holy life have not come to know of the countless evil and unwholesome mental aspirations that arise in him in this way, that person, [despite] not being a renunciant, is perceived as a renunciant. Not being a wise renun- ciant, he is perceived as a wise renunciant. Not [possessing] right com- prehension, he is perceived as possessing right comprehension. Not [pos- sessing] right mindfulness, he is perceived as [possessing] right mind fulness. Not purified, he is perceived as purified. In the same way, venerable friend, when his wise companions in the holy life do come to know of the countless evil and unwholesome mental aspirations that arise in him in this way, that person, not being a renunciant, is perceived as not a renunciant. Not being a wise renunciant, he is perceived

as not being a wise renunciant. Not [possessing] right comprehension, he is perceived as not [possessing] right comprehension. Not [possessing] right mindfulness, he is perceived as not [possessing] right mindfulness. Not purified, he is perceived as not purified. Venerable friend, it should be known that such a person is not to be asso ciated with, not to be respected and honoured. If monks associate with someone who should not be associated with, or respect someone who should not be respected, then they will for a long time be unable to attain profit and benefit, and will not secure their own well-being. They will not find security and happiness but will give rise to suffering, sorrow, and grief.^150 [In contrast to this,] venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “I have committed a breach of the precepts. Let others not know that I have committed a breach of the pre cepts!” Venerable friend, it may be that others do come to know of that person’s breach of the precepts, but that in spite of his breach of the precepts being known by others his mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both wholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “I have committed a breach of the precepts. Let others admonish me in private; let them not admonish me amidst the sangha regarding my breach of the precepts!” Venerable friend, it may be that others admonish that person amidst the sangha rather than in private, but that in spite of being admonished by others amidst the sangha rather than in private, his mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both whole some [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “I have committed a breach of the precepts. Let a person superior to me admonish me; let not a person who is of lower standing than myself admonish me about my breach of the precepts!” Venerable friend, it may be that a person of lower standing than himself admonishes him about his breach of the precepts, rather than a person who is superior to him, but in spite of being admonished by a person of lower standing than himself rather than by a person superior to him, his mind does not

give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both wholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “Let me sit before the Buddha and ask him about the Dharma, [in response to which] the World-honored One gives a teaching to the monks! Let not another monk sit before the Buddha and ask him about the Dharma, [in response to which] the World-honored One gives a teaching to the monks!” Venerable friend, it may be that another monk sits before the Buddha and asks him about the Dharma, [in response to which] the World-honored One gives a teaching to the monks, but despite that other monk sitting before the Buddha and asking him about the Dharma, [in response to which] the World-honored One gives a teaching to the monks, [that person’s] mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both wholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “When the monks enter [the village to beg alms], let me be at the head [of the line of monks], with all the [remaining] monks fol- lowing me as we enter! When the monks enter [the village], let not another monk be at the head [of the line], with all the remaining monks following him as we enter!” Venerable friend, it may be that when the monks enter, another monk is at the head [of the line] and all the [remaining monks] follow him when they enter, but despite that other monk being at the head [of the line] with the others following him when they enter, [that person’s] mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both wholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “When the monks have entered [the refectory], let me get the best seat, be the first to be given a seat, the first to receive water for [hand] washing, and the first to be served food! When the monks have entered [the refectory], let not another monk get the best seat, be the first to be given a seat, the first to receive water for [hand] washing, and the first to be served food!” Venerable friend, it may be that when the monks have entered [the refectory], another monk gets the best seat, is the first to be given a seat, the first to receive water for [hand] washing, and the

first to be served food, but despite that other monk getting the best seat when the monks have entered [the refectory], being the first to be given a seat, the first to receive water for [hand] washing, and the first to be served food, [that person’s] mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both wholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “When the monks have finished their meal, put away their bowls, and washed [their hands], let me be the one to give a teaching to the householders, exhorting and inspiring them, fully delighting them! When the monks have finished their meal, put away their bowls, and washed [their hands], let not another monk be the one to give a teaching to the householders, exhorting and inspiring them, fully delighting them!” Venerable friend, it may be that when the monks have finished their meal, put away their bowls, and washed [their hands], another monk gives a teaching to the householders, exhorting and inspiring them, fully delighting them, but despite that other monk, when the monks have finished their meal, put away their bowls, and washed [their hands], giving a teaching to the householders, exhorting and inspiring them, fully delighting them, [that person’s] mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both whole some [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “When householders approach the monastery, let me be the one to meet and accompany them, to sit with them, and to engage in discussion with them! When householders approach the monastery, let not another monk be the one to meet and accompany them, to sit with them, and to engage in discussion with them!” Venerable friend, it may be that when householders approach the monastery, another monk meets and accompanies them, sits with them, and engages in discussion with them, but despite that other monk meeting and accompanying the house holders when they approach the monastery, sitting with them, and engaging in discussion with them, [that person’s] mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. The absence of evil [thoughts] and the absence of desire in his mind are both wholesome [states].

Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “Let me be recognized by the king, the senior ministers, brahmins, and householders, and be respected by the people of the country! Let not another monk be recognized by the king, the senior ministers, brahmins, and householders, or be respected by the people of the country!” Venerable friend, it may be that another monk is recognized by the king, the senior ministers, brahmins, and householders, and respected by the people of the country, but despite that other monk being recognized by the king, the senior ministers, brahmins, and householders, and being respected by the people of the country, [that person’s] mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both wholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “Let me be respected by members of the four assemblies: monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples! Let not another monk be respected by members of the four assemblies: monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples!” Venerable friend, it may be that another monk is respected by members of the four assemblies: monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples; but despite that other monk being respected by members of the four assemblies: monks, nuns, male lay disciples, and female lay disciples, [that person’s] mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both wholesome [states]. Venerable friend, suppose that a person’s mind does not give rise to a desire like this: “Let me acquire [excellent] robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and bedding, medicine, all the requisites of life! Let not another monk acquire [excellent] robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and bedding, medicine, all the requisites of life!” Venerable friend, it may be that another monk acquires [excellent] robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and bedding, medicine, all the requisites of life, but despite that other monk acquiring [excellent] robes and blankets, food and drink, beds and bedding, medicine, all the requisites of life, [that person’s] mind does not give rise to evil [thoughts]. That absence of evil [thoughts] and that absence of desire in his mind are both wholesome [states].

Venerable friend, so long as his wise companions in the holy life have not come to know of the countless wholesome mental aspirations that arise in him in this way, that person, [despite] being a renunciant, is per ceived as not a renunciant. Being a wise renunciant he is perceived as not a wise renunciant. [Possessing] right comprehension, he is perceived as not [possessing] right comprehension. [Possessing] right mindfulness, he is perceived as not [possessing] right mindfulness. Being purified, he is perceived as not purified. [But,] venerable friend, when his wise companions in the holy life do come to know of the countless wholesome mental aspirations that arise in him in this way, that person, being a renunciant, is perceived as a renunciant. Being a wise renunciant, he is perceived as a wise renunciant. [Possessing] right comprehension, he is perceived as [possessing] right comprehension. [Possessing] right mindfulness, he is perceived as [possessing] right mind fulness. Being purified, he is perceived as purified. Venerable friend, suppose that a person buys, from a shop or a smithy, a bronze dish with a lid. He fills it with various appealing and delicious food and drink and puts on the lid. Then he carries it past shops, close to where crowds of people are walking. All the people who see [the dish] have no desire to eat [from it]. They do not experience desire or relishing. They have repugnance toward it, as the perception of impurity has arisen in them. They say, “Take away those feces! Take away those feces!”^151 That person, having carried the bowl to a certain location, lifts the lid and reveals [the contents]. When the people see what is inside, all of them have the desire to eat it. They experience desire and relishing. They no longer experience repugnance toward it, as the perception of purity has arisen in them. Even those who are not hungry want to eat it, not to mention those who are hungry. In the same way, venerable friend, so long as his wise companions in the holy life have not come to know of the countless wholesome mental aspirations that arise in him in this way, that person, [despite] being a renunciant, is perceived as not a renunciant. Being a wise renunciant he is perceived as not a wise renunciant. [Possessing] right comprehension, he is perceived as not [possessing] right comprehension. [Possessing]

right mindfulness, he is perceived as not [possessing] right mindfulness. Being purified, he is perceived as not purified. [But,] venerable friend, when his wise companions in the holy life do come to know of the countless wholesome mental aspirations that arise in him in this way, that person, being a renunciant, is perceived as a renun- ciant. Being a wise renunciant, he is perceived as a wise renunciant. [Pos- sessing] right comprehension, he is perceived as [possessing] right com- prehension. [Possessing] right mindfulness, he is perceived as [possessing] right mindfulness. Being purified, he is perceived as purified. Venerable friend, it should be known that such a person is to be asso- ciated with and to be respected. If monks associate with someone who should be associated with, or respect someone who should be respected, then they will for a long time be able to attain profit and benefit, and will secure their own well-being. They will find security and happiness, and be free of suffering, sorrow, and grief. At that time, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was in the assembly. The ven- erable Mahāmoggallāna said, “Venerable Sāriputta, I would like to tell a simile in relation to this topic. Am I permitted to tell it?” Venerable Sāriputta said, “Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, please tell the simile you wish to tell.” Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said: Venerable Sāriputta, I recall that on one occasion I was dwelling on Mount Vulture Peak at Rājagaha. At that time, when the night was over, toward dawn, I put on my robes, took my bowl, entered Rājagaha, and went to beg alms. I approached the house of the naked ascetic Puṇṇaputta, a former cartwright.^152 At that time, at a neighboring house, another cartwright was planing a felloe for a cart. Just then the naked ascetic Puṇṇaputta, the former cartwright, arrived at that house. Seeing that [other cartwright] planing a felloe, the naked ascetic Puṇṇaputta, the former cartwright, had this thought: “If this cartwright uses his adze to plane the felloe by cutting off this and that defect, in this way that felloe will become excellent.” Then, just as if he knew the thought in the mind of the naked ascetic Puṇṇaputta, the cartwright took his adze and cut off this and that defect.

Then the naked ascetic Puṇṇaputta was overjoyed and said, “Cartwright, it is as if you knew my mind with your mind. Why is that? Because you used your adze to plane that felloe by cutting off this and that defect, just as I was thinking you could.” In the same way, Venerable Sāriputta, suppose there are those who are flattering, deceitful, envious, lack faith, are negligent, lack right mindfulness and right comprehension, lack samādhi, lack wisdom, are conceited, deluded, do not guard the sense faculties, do not train in <seclusion>,^153 and lack discernment—on account of knowing their minds with his mind, Venerable Sāriputta has given this teaching. Venerable Sāriputta, there are those who are not flattering, not deceitful, not envious, who possess faith, are diligent and without sluggishness, endowed with right mindfulness and right comprehension, who cultivate samādhi and cultivate wisdom, are not conceited or deluded, guard the sense faculties, train extensively in <seclusion>, and discern skillfully. When they hear the Dharma taught by Venerable Sāriputta, then just like food for the hungry and drink for the thirsty, [what comes from his] mouth gets through to their minds. Venerable Sāriputta, suppose a girl from the warrior caste, the brahmin caste, the merchant caste, or the worker caste, who is beautiful and attrac tive, has bathed herself well, anointed her body with perfume, put on bright and clean clothes, and adorned herself with various jewels.^154 Now, suppose a man who thinks [well] of that girl, seeking her benefit, welfare, peace, and happiness, takes a wreath made of lotuses, a wreath of champak flowers, a wreath of great-flowered jasmine ( sumanā ), a wreath of Arabian jasmine ( vassikā ), or a wreath of roses and gives it to that girl. That girl will joyously receive [the wreath] with both hands and place it on her head. It is the same, Venerable Sāriputta, with those who are not flattering, not deceitful, not envious, who possess faith, are diligent and without sluggishness, endowed with right mindfulness and right comprehension, who cultivate samādhi and cultivate wisdom, are not conceited or deluded, guard the sense faculties, train extensively in <seclusion>, and discern skillfully.

When they hear the Dharma taught by Venerable Sāriputta, then just like food for the hungry and drink for the thirsty, [what comes from his] mouth gets through to their minds. Venerable Sāriputta, it is extraordinary, it is remarkable! Venerable Sāriputta so often uplifts and supports his companions in the holy life by helping them abandon what is unwholesome and establishing them in what is wholesome. Having praised each other like this, these two venerable ones rose from their seats and left. Thus spoke Venerable Sāriputta. Having heard what Venerable Sāriputta said, Venerable Mahāmoggallāna and the [other] monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma87-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA25.6]] |  |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA88]], [[MA93]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA87]]
> ◄  [[ma86-bdk]] 📜  [[ma88-bdk]] ►
