---
sutta_code: "MA88"
sutta_title:
  - "求法 "
  - "Quest for the Dharma"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA88]]
> ◄  [[ma87-bdk]] 📜  [[ma89-bdk]] ►

### 88. The Discourse on the Quest for the Dharma

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was traveling in Kosala country with a great assembly of monks. He went to a rosewood grove north of Pañ- casāla village, along with various renowned and highly regarded elders, chief disciples such as Venerable Sāriputta, Venerable Mahāmoggalāna, Venerable Kassapa, Venerable Mahākaccāna, Venerable Anuruddha, Venerable Revata, and Venerable Ānanda. Such renowned and highly regarded elders, such chief disciples were dwelling next to the Buddha’s thatched hut [north of] Pañcasāla village.^156 At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks: You should be on a quest for the Dharma, not on a quest for food and drink.^157 Why is that? Out of loving-kindness and compassion for my dis- ciples, I wish you to be on a quest for the Dharma, not on a quest for food and drink. If you are not on a quest for the Dharma and are on a quest for food and drink, then you will disgrace yourselves and [as your teacher] I will also not have a good reputation. If you are on a quest for the Dharma and not on a quest for food and drink, then you will dignify yourselves and [as your teacher] I will also have a good reputation.

How are disciples who practice under the Buddha on a quest for food and drink and not on a quest for the Dharma? Suppose that I have had my fill, having finished eating my meal, and there is still some food left over. Then two monks arrive who are hungry and weak, and I tell them, “I have had my fill, having finished eating my meal, and there is still some food left over. Take that food if you wish to eat. If you do not take it, then I shall throw it away where there is no greenery or drop it into water where there is no life.” Then the first of the two monks thinks to himself, “The World-honored One has had his fill, having finished eating his meal, and there is still some food left over. If I do not take it, the World-honored One will certainly throw it away where there is no greenery or drop it into water where there is no life. I would now rather take and eat it.” He then takes the food. Although that monk, having taken the food, passes the day and night pleasantly and has gained comfort and well-being, yet in taking the food that monk is not conforming to the Buddha’s intention. Why is that? Because by taking the food that monk does not achieve having few desires, does not know contentment, is not easily supported, is not easily satisfied, does not know the [proper] time, does not know restraint, does not gain energy, does not attain sitting in meditation, does not attain purity of conduct, does not attain seclusion, does not attain mental unification, does not attain diligence, and does not attain nirvana. Thus, in taking the food, that monk is not conforming to the Buddha’s intention. This is how disciples practicing under the Buddha are on a quest for food and drink and not on a quest for the Dharma. How are disciples on a quest for the Dharma and not on a quest for food and drink? Of those two monks, the second one thinks to himself, “The World-honored One has had his fill, has finished eating his meal, and there is still some food left over. If I do not take it, the World-honored One will certainly throw it away where there is no greenery or drop it into water where there is no life. Again, the World-honored One has said that among [the types of] nutriment this is the most lowly, namely remnants of food. I would now rather not take this food.” Thinking thus, he does not take it. Although that monk, through not taking the food, passes the day and night in suffering, not having gained comfort and well-being, yet, in not

taking the food, that monk is conforming to the Buddha’s intention. Why is that? By not taking the food that monk achieves having few desires, knows contentment, is easily supported, is easily satisfied, knows the [proper] time, knows restraint, gains energy, attains sitting in meditation, attains purity of conduct, attains seclusion, attains mental unification, attains diligence, and attains nirvana. Thus, in not taking the food, that monk is conforming to the Buddha’s intention. This is how disciples practicing under the Buddha are on a quest for the Dharma and not on a quest for food and drink.

Then the World-honored One addressed the disciples:

If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion but his senior disciples do not delight in abiding in seclusion, then this Dharma and discipline is not conducive to the welfare of many people or the happiness of many people. It is not [being practiced] out of compassion and sympathy for the world, nor for the benefit, welfare, peace, and hap- piness of _deva_ s and human beings.^158 If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion but his intermediate... his new disciples do not delight in abiding in seclusion, then this Dharma and discipline will not be conducive to the welfare of many people or the happiness of many people. It is not [being practiced] out of compassion and sympathy for the world, nor for the ben- efit, welfare, peace, and happiness of _deva_ s and human beings. [On the other hand,] if a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion and his senior disciples also delight in abiding in seclusion, then this Dharma and discipline are conducive to the welfare of many people and the happiness of many people. It is [being practiced] out of compassion and sympathy for the world and for the benefit, welfare, peace, and happiness of _deva_ s and human beings. If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion and his intermediate... his new disciples also delight in abiding in seclu- sion, then this Dharma and discipline will be conducive to the welfare of many people and the happiness of many people. It is [being practiced] out of compassion and sympathy for the world and for the benefit, welfare, peace, and happiness of _deva_ s and human beings.

At that time Venerable Sāriputta was present in the assembly. Then the World-honored One said to him: Sāriputta, for the sake of the monks, deliver a discourse on the Dharma that accords with the Dharma. I am afflicted by a backache and wish to rest a little.^159 Venerable Sāriputta assented to the Buddha’s instruction: “Certainly, World-honored One.” Then the World-honored One folded his outer robe in four to serve as a bed, rolled his main robe into a pillow, and lay down on his right side with one foot on the other, maintaining the perception of light, mindful and atten tive, and always keeping in mind the intention of getting up again. Then Venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks: Venerable friends, you should know that the World-honored One has given this teaching in brief: “If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion but his senior disciples do not delight in abiding in seclusion, then this Dharma and discipline will not be conducive to the welfare of many people or the happiness of many people. It is not [being practiced] out of compassion and sympathy for the world, nor for the ben efit, welfare, peace, and happiness of deva s and human beings. “If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclu sion but his intermediate... his new disciples do not delight in abiding in seclusion, then this Dharma and discipline will not be conducive to the welfare of many people or the happiness of many people. It is not [being practiced] out of compassion and sympathy for the world, nor for the ben efit, welfare, peace, and happiness of deva s and human beings. “[On the other hand,] if a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion and his senior disciples also delight in abiding in seclusion, then this Dharma and discipline will be conducive to the welfare of many people and the happiness of many people. It is [being practiced] out of compassion and sympathy for the world and for the benefit, welfare, peace, and happiness of deva s and human beings. “If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclu sion, and his intermediate... his new disciples also delight in abiding in

seclusion, then this Dharma and discipline will be conducive to the welfare of many people and the happiness of many people. It is [being practiced] out of compassion and sympathy for the world and for the benefit, welfare, peace, and happiness of _deva_ s and human beings.” Regarding this teaching given so briefly by the World-honored One, how do you understand its meaning? How would you elaborate on it and analyze it?^160 Then one monk in the assembly said: Venerable Sāriputta, here a highly regarded elder declares about himself, “I have attained final knowledge: Birth has been ended for me, the holy life is established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence; I know this as it really is.”’ Upon hearing that monk’s self-declaration of his attainment of final knowledge, his companions in the holy life are filled with joy. Another monk said: Venerable Sāriputta, when intermediate and new disciples are on the quest for unsurpassable nirvana and aspire to it, their companions in the holy life are delighted on seeing that. In these ways those monks explained the meaning, but it did not accord with what Venerable Sāriputta had in mind. Venerable Sāriputta addressed those monks: Venerable friends, listen to what I shall say to you. If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion, but his senior dis- ciples do not delight in abiding in seclusion, then his senior disciples are to be reproached for three reasons. What are the three? [If] the teacher delights in seclusion but his senior disciples do not train in ,^161 then his senior disciples are to be reproached for this. If the teacher teaches the abandoning of certain [mental] states but his senior disciples do not train in abandoning those states, then his senior disciples are to be reproached for this. [If] his senior disciples give up making effort for that which can be experienced and realized, then his senior disciples are to be reproached for this.

If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion but his senior disciples do not delight in abiding in seclusion, then his senior disciples are to be reproached for these three reasons. Venerable friends, if a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion, but his intermediate... his new disciples do not delight in abiding in seclusion, then his intermediate... his new disciples are to be reproached for three reasons. What are the three? [If] the teacher delights in seclusion but his intermediate... his new disciples do not train in <seclusion>, then his intermediate... his new dis ciples are to be reproached for this. If the teacher teaches the abandoning of certain [mental] states but his intermediate... his new senior disciples do not train in abandoning those states, then his intermediate... his new disciples are to be reproached for this. [If] his intermediate... his new dis ciples give up making effort for that which can be experienced and realized, then his intermediate... his new disciples are to be reproached for this. If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion but his intermediate... his new disciples do not delight in abiding in seclusion, then his intermediate... his new disciples are to be reproached for these three reasons. [On the other hand,] venerable friends, if a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion, and his senior disciples also delight in abiding in seclusion, then his senior disciples are to be praised for three reasons. What are the three? [If] the teacher delights in seclusion and his senior disciples also train in <seclusion>, then his senior disciples are to be praised for this. If the teacher teaches the abandoning of certain [mental] states and his senior disciples also train in abandoning those states, then his senior disciples are to be praised for this. [If] his senior disciples do not give up making effort but practice diligently for that which can be experienced and realized, then his senior disciples are to be praised for this. If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion and his senior disciples also delight in abiding in seclusion, then his senior disciples are to be praised for these three reasons. Venerable friends, if a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion, and his intermediate... his new disciples also

delight in abiding in seclusion, then his intermediate... his new disciples are to be praised for three reasons. What are the three? [If] the teacher delights in seclusion and his intermediate... his new disciples also train in , then his intermediate... his new disciples are to be praised for this. If the teacher teaches the abandoning of certain states and his intermediate... his new disciples also train in abandoning those states, then his intermediate... his new disciples are to be praised for this. [If] his intermediate... his new disciples do not give up making effort but practice diligently for that which can be experienced and realized, then his intermediate... his new disciples are to be praised for this. If a teacher of the Dharma and discipline delights in abiding in seclusion, and his intermediate... his new disciples also delight in abiding in seclu- sion, then his intermediate... his new disciples are to be praised for these three reasons.

Venerable Sāriputta said further to the monks:

Venerable friends, there is a middle way for the attainment of mental sta- bility, the attainment of samādhi, and the attainment of bliss, which conforms to the Dharma and is in accordance with the Dharma, and which leads to penetration, awakening, and nirvana. Venerable friends, what is the middle way for the attainment of mental stability, the attainment of samādhi, and the attainment of bliss, which conforms to the Dharma and is in accordance with the Dharma, and which leads to penetration, awakening, and nirvana? Venerable friends, thoughts of sensual desire are evil, and the vice of thoughts of sensual desire is also evil. One [should] abandon thoughts of sensual desire and the vice of thoughts of sensual desire. Like this with ill- will,... enmity,... envy,... deceit,... flattery,... lack of shame,... lack of scruples,... conceit,... overbearing pride,... arrogance,... neg- ligence,... luxuriousness,... resentment,... disputatiousness.... Venerable friends, craving is evil, attachment is also evil. One [should] abandon craving and attachment. Venerable friends, this is the middle way for the attainment of mental stability, the attainment of samādhi, and the attainment of bliss, which conforms to the Dharma and is in accor- dance with the Dharma, and leads to penetration, awakening, and nirvana.

Again, venerable friends, there is this middle way for the attainment of mental stability, the attainment of samādhi, and the attainment of bliss, which conforms to the Dharma, is in accordance with the Dharma, and leads to penetration, awakening, and nirvana. And what, venerable friends, is this middle way for the attainment of mental stability, the attain- ment of samādhi, and the attainment of bliss, which conforms to the Dharma, is in accordance with the Dharma, and leads to penetration, awak- ening, and nirvana? It is the noble eightfold path: right view... up to... right samādhi; these are the eight. Venerable friends, this is the middle way for the attain- ment of mental stability, the attainment of samādhi, and the attainment of bliss, which conforms to the Dharma and is in accordance with the Dharma, and leads to penetration, awakening, and nirvana. By then the pain afflicting the World-honored One had dissipated and he was at ease and comfortable.^162 Rising from his reclining position, he sat cross-legged and praised Venerable Sāriputta:

It is well, it is well, Sāriputta, you have given the monks a discourse on the Dharma that accords with the Dharma. Sāriputta, you should continue to explain to the monks the Dharma that accords with the Dharma. Sāri - putta, you should frequently explain to the monks the Dharma that accords with the Dharma. Then the World-honored One addressed the monks: You should all remember [this discourse on] the Dharma that accords with the Dharma, recite it and commit it to memory. Why is that? [This discourse on] the Dharma accords with the Dharma; it contains the Dharma and is meaningful; it is the basis of the holy life, leading to penetration, awakening, and nirvana. As clansmen who have shaved off your hair and beards, donned the yellow robes, and out of faith given up the household life, having gone forth to train in the path, you should remember well this Dharma that accords with the Dharma. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Sāriputta and the [other] monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma88-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA18.3]] |  |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA87]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA88]]
> ◄  [[ma87-bdk]] 📜  [[ma89-bdk]] ►
