---
sutta_code: "MA89"
sutta_title:
  - "比丘請 "
  - "Monk’s Request"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA89]]
> ◄  [[ma88-bdk]] 📜  [[ma90-bdk]] ►

### 89. The Discourse on Monk’s Request

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, in the Squirrels’ Sanctuary, where he was observing the rains retreat with a great assembly of monks.^164 At that time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the monks: Venerable friends, it may be that a monk requests of other monks, “Ven- erable friends, please advise me, instruct me, and admonish me. Do not [regard] me as a difficult person.” Why is that? Venerable friends, suppose that a certain person is difficult to admonish, and possesses qualities that make him difficult to admonish. Because that person possesses qualities that make him difficult to admonish, his companions in the holy life do not advise, instruct, or admonish him, but [they regard] him as a difficult person. Venerable friends, what are the qualities that make a person difficult to admonish, such that if someone possesses these qualities that make him difficult to admonish, his companions in the holy life do not advise, instruct, or admonish him but [they regard] him as a difficult person? Venerable friends, suppose that a certain person has evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires. Venerable friends, having evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires is a quality that makes this person difficult to admonish. In the same way, having mental defilements and conduct [based on such] defilements,... not speaking and being uncommunicative,... being deceitful and flattering,... being avaricious and envious,... lacking shame and lacking scruples,... harboring ill-will and malice,... becoming angry and uttering angry words,... admonishing the monk who admonishes him,... being disdainful of the monk who admonishes him,... revealing a transgression of the monk who admonishes him,... prevaricating by leading the talk astray and refusing to talk,... becoming angry and burning with resentment,... [associating with] bad friends and bad companions,... lacking gratitude and not knowing gratitude.^165 Venerable friends, lacking gratitude and not knowing gratitude is a quality that makes this person difficult to admonish. Venerable friends,

these are the qualities that make a person difficult to admonish, such that if someone possesses these qualities that make him difficult to admonish, his companions in the holy life do not advise, instruct, or admonish him but [they regard] him as a difficult person. Venerable friends, a monk should reflect on such qualities in himself. Venerable friends, [one should reflect]: “If a person has evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires, I will not like him. If I have evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires, others will also not like me.” Contemplating like this, a monk does not engage in evil desires and in thoughts [based on such] desires. This is how one should train.^166 In the same way, having mental defilements and conduct [based on such] defilements,... not speaking and being uncommunicative,... being deceitful and flattering,... being avaricious and envious,... lacking shame and lacking scruples,... harboring ill-will and malice,... becoming angry and uttering angry words,... admonishing the monk who admon ishes him,... being disdainful of the monk who admonishes him,... revealing a transgression of the monk who admonishes him,... prevar icating by leading the talk astray and refusing to talk,... becoming angry and burning with resentment,... [associating with] bad friends and bad companions,... lacking gratitude and not knowing gratitude. Venerable friends, [one should reflect]: “If a person lacks gratitude and does not know gratitude, I will not like him. If I lack gratitude and do not know gratitude, others will also not like me.” Contemplating like this, a monk does not engage in lack of gratitude and not knowing gratitude. This is how one should train. Venerable friends, it may be that a monk does not request of other monks, “Venerable friends, please advise me, instruct me, and admonish me, and do not [regard] me as a difficult person.” Why is that? Venerable friends, suppose that a certain person is easy to admonish, and possesses qualities that make him easy to admonish. Because that person possesses qualities that make him easy to admonish his companions in the holy life advise him well, instruct him well, and admonish him well, and do not [regard] him as a difficult person. Venerable friends, what are the qualities that make a person easy to admonish, such that if someone possesses these qualities that make him

easy to admonish his companions in the holy life advise him well, instruct him well, and admonish him well, and do not [regard] him as a difficult person? Venerable friends, suppose that a certain person does not have evil desires or thoughts [based on such] desires. Venerable friends, not having evil desires or thoughts [based on such] desires is a quality that makes this person easy to admonish. In the same way, not having mental defilements or conduct [based on such] defilements,... not refusing to speak or being uncommunicative,... not being deceitful or flattering,... not being avaricious or envious,... not lacking shame or scruples,... not harboring ill-will or malice,... not becoming angry or uttering angry words,... not admonishing the monk who admonishes him,... not being disdainful of the monk who admonishes him,... not revealing a transgression of the monk who admon- ishes him,... not prevaricating by leading the talk astray or refusing to talk,... not becoming angry or burning with resentment,... not [associating with] bad friends or bad companions,... not lacking gratitude or knowledge of gratitude. Venerable friends, not lacking gratitude or knowledge of gratitude is a quality that makes such a person easy to admonish. Venerable friends, these are the qualities that make a person easy to admonish, such that if someone possesses these qualities that make him easy to admonish, his companions in the holy life advise him well, instruct him well, and admon- ish him well, and do not [regard] him as a difficult person. Venerable friends, a monk should reflect on [such qualities] in himself. Venerable friends, [one should reflect]: “If a person does not have evil desires or thoughts [based on such] desires, I will like him. If I do not have evil desires or thoughts [based on such] desires, then others will like me.” Contemplating like this, a monk does not engage in evil desires or in thoughts [based on such] desires. This is how one should train.^167 In the same way, not having mental defilements or conduct [based on such] defilements,... not refusing to speak or being uncommunicative,... not being deceitful or flattering,... not being avaricious or envious,... not lacking shame or scruples,... not harboring ill-will or malice,... not becoming angry or uttering angry words,... not admonishing the

monk who admonishes him,... not being disdainful of the monk who admonishes him,... not revealing a transgression of the monk who admon ishes him,... not prevaricating by leading the talk astray or refusing to talk,... not becoming angry or burning with resentment,... not [asso ciating with] bad friends or bad companions,... not lacking gratitude or knowledge of gratitude. Venerable friends, [one should reflect]: “If a person does not lack grat itude but knows gratitude, I will like him. If I do not lack gratitude but know gratitude, others will also like me.” Contemplating like this, a monk does not lack gratitude but knows gratitude. This is how one should train. Venerable friends, a monk will ensure much benefit for himself if he contemplates like this: “Do I have evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires, or do I not have evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires?” Venerable friends, when contemplating [like this], if a monk finds that he does have evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires, then he is not delighted and seeks to abandon them. Venerable friends, when contemplating [like this], if a monk finds that he does not have evil desires or thoughts [based on such] desires, then he is delighted, [thinking,] “I am pure [in regard to these states]” and being delighted on this account, he [keeps] pursuing his training in the superb Dharma. Venerable friends, it is just as a person with [good] eyesight might look at himself in a mirror to see whether or not his face is clean. Venerable friends, if that person with [good] eyesight sees that there is dirt on his face, then he is not delighted and seeks to wash it off. Venerable friends, if that person with [good] eyesight sees that there is no dirt on his face, then he is delighted, [thinking,] “My face is clean,” and is delighted on this account. Venerable friends, when contemplating [like this], if a monk finds that he has evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires, then he is not delighted and seeks to abandon them. Venerable friends, when contem plating [like this], if a monk finds that he does not have evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires, then he is delighted, [thinking,] “I am pure [in regard to these states]” and being delighted on this account, he [keeps] pursuing his training in the superb Dharma.

In the same way [the monk contemplates like this]: “Do I have mental defilements and conduct [based on such] defilements, or do I not have mental defilements and conduct [based on such] defilements? Do I refuse to speak and remain uncommunicative, or do I speak and remain com- municative? Am I deceitful and flattering, or am I not deceitful and flat- tering? Am I avaricious and envious, or am I not avaricious and envious? Do I lack shame and scruples, or do I have shame and scruples? Do I harbor ill-will and malice, or do I not harbor ill-will and malice? Do I become angry and utter angry words, or do I not become angry and utter angry words? Do I admonish the monk who admonishes me, or do I not admonish the monk who admonishes me? Am I disdainful of the monk who admonishes me or am I not disdainful of the monk who admonishes me? Do I reveal a transgression of the monk who admonishes me, or do I not reveal a transgression of the monk who admonishes me? Do I pre- varicate by leading the talk astray and refusing to speak, or do I not pre- varicate by leading the talk astray and refusing to talk? Do I become angry and burn with resentment or do I not become angry and burn with resent- ment? Do I [associate with] bad friends and bad companions, or do I not [associate with] bad friends and bad companions? Do I lack gratitude and not know gratitude, or do I have gratitude and know gratitude?” Venerable friends, when contemplating [like this], if a monk finds that he lacks gratitude and does not know gratitude, then he is not delighted and seeks to abandon this [state]. Venerable friends, when contemplating [like this], if a monk finds that he does not lack gratitude and does know gratitude, then he is delighted, [thinking,] “I am pure [in regard to these states]” and being delighted on this account, he [keeps] pursuing his training in the superb Dharma. Venerable friends, it is just as a person with [good] eyesight might look at himself in a mirror to see whether or not his face is clean. Venerable friends, if that person with [good] eyesight sees that there is dirt on his face, then he is not delighted and seeks to wash it off. [But] venerable friends, if that person with [good] eyesight sees that there is no dirt on his face, then he is delighted, [thinking,] “My face is clean,” and is delighted on this account.

Venerable friends, when contemplating [like this], if a monk finds that he lacks gratitude and does not know gratitude, then he is not delighted and seeks to abandon this [state]. Venerable friends, when contemplating [like this], if a monk finds that he does not lack gratitude and does know gratitude, then he is delighted, [thinking,] “I am pure [in regard to these states]” and being delighted on this account, he [keeps] pursuing his training in the superb Dharma.^168 Because of being delighted, he attains rapture. Because of attaining rapture, his body becomes tranquil. Because the body is tranquil, he expe riences pleasure. Because of experiencing pleasure, his mind becomes collected. Venerable friends, because of his mind becoming collected, a learned noble disciple sees and knows as it really is. Because of seeing and knowing as it really is, he experiences disenchantment. Because of disenchantment, he experiences dispassion. Because of dispassion, he attains liberation. Because of being liberated, he attains knowledge of being liberated, knowing as it really is: “Birth has been ended, the holy life has been established, what had to be done has been done, there will not be another experiencing of existence.” Thus spoke Venerable Mahāmoggallāna. Having heard what Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma89-) 

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA87]], [[MA93]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA89]]
> ◄  [[ma88-bdk]] 📜  [[ma90-bdk]] ►
