---
sutta_code: "MA91"
sutta_title:
  - "Kosambiya Sutta "
  - "Bhikkhus of Kosambi"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA91]]
> ◄  [[ma90-bdk]] 📜  [[ma92-bdk]] ►

### 91. The Discourse on Cunda's Inquiry about Views

Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was dwelling at Kosambī, in Ghosita’s Park. At that time, in the afternoon, Venerable Mahācunda emerged from sitting in meditation and approached the Buddha. Having paid homage at the Buddha’s feet, he stepped back, sat to one side, and said:

World-honored One, regarding the various views that keep arising in the world—speculations about the existence of a self, of living beings, of human beings, of a soul, of a life-substratum, and of the world—World honored One, in what way should one know and in what way should one see so that these views are eradicated and abandoned, and other views are not perpetuated and clung to? The World-honored One said: Cunda, regarding the various views that keep arising in the world—spec ulations about the existence of a self, of living beings, of human beings, of a soul, of a life-substratum, and of the world—if, Cunda, [one realizes] the remainderless cessation of all phenomena, [then] knowing like this and seeing like this, these views are eradicated and abandoned, and other

views are not perpetuated and clung to. [For this purpose] one should train in effacement. Cunda, what constitutes “effacement” in the noble Dharma and disci pline? Here a monk, secluded from sensual desires, secluded from evil and unwholesome states, with [directed] awareness and [sustained] con templation... up to... dwells having attained the fourth absorption. He [might] think, “I am abiding in effacement.” But, Cunda, in the noble Dharma and discipline these four higher states of mind do not yet constitute “effacement.” They are “pleasant abidings here and now.” As a practitioner emerges from [these absorptions] and enters them again, he [might] think, “I am abiding in effacement.” But, Cunda, in the noble Dharma and discipline these do not yet constitute “effacement.” A monk, with the complete transcending of perceptions of form... up to... enters and abides in the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non perception. He might think, “I am abiding in effacement.” But, Cunda, in the noble Dharma and discipline these four peaceful liberations, which transcend form, having attained the formless, do not yet constitute “efface ment.” On emerging from them, a practitioner might proclaim to others or think to himself, “I am abiding in effacement.” But, Cunda, in the noble Dharma and discipline these do not yet constitute “effacement.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] have evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires; I shall not have evil desires or thoughts [based on such] desires.”^175 Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] have harmful intent and anger; I shall not have harmful intent and anger.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] kill living beings,... take what is not given,... not be celibate; I shall be celi bate.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may be] overcome by covetousness,... disputatiousness,... sloth-and-torpor,... restlessness,... arrogance,... doubt; I shall not be overcome by doubt.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may be] fettered by ill-will,... flattery,... deceit,... lack of shame and scruples; I shall have shame and scruples.”

Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] have conceit; I shall not have conceit.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] have overbearing pride; I shall not have over- bearing pride.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] have little learning; I shall have much learning.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] not contemplate wholesome states; I shall contemplate wholesome states.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] engage in evil conduct contrary to the Dharma; I shall engage in sublime conduct according to the Dharma.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] engage in false speech,... divisive speech,... harsh speech,... frivolous speech,... evil behavior; I shall not engage in evil behavior.” Cunda, one should train in effacement [like this]: “Others [may] lack faith,... be negligent,... lack mindfulness,... lack samādhi,... have faulty wisdom; I shall not have faulty wisdom.” Cunda, even just to incline the mind toward wholesome states and to wish to train in them will be of much benefit; how much more so if one practices wholesome states in one’s bodily and verbal actions! Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] have evil desires and thoughts [based on such] desires; I shall not have evil desires or thoughts [based on such] desires.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] have harmful intent and anger; I shall not have harmful intent and anger.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] kill living beings,... take what is not given,... and not be celibate; I shall be celi- bate.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may be] overcome by covetousness,... disputatiousness,... sloth-and-torpor,... restlessness,... arrogance,... and doubt; I shall not [be overcome by] doubt.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] be fettered by ill-will,... flattery,... deceit,... lack shame and scruples; I shall have shame and scruples.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] have conceit; I shall not have conceit.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] have overbearing pride; I shall not have overbearing pride.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] have

little learning; I shall have much learning.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] not contemplate wholesome states; I shall contemplate wholesome states.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] engage in evil conduct contrary to the Dharma; I shall engage in sublime conduct according to the Dharma.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] engage in false speech,... divisive speech,... harsh speech,... frivolous speech,... evil behavior; I shall not engage in evil behavior.” Cunda, one should incline the mind [like this]: “Others [may] lack faith,... be negligent,... lack mindfulness,... lack samādhi,... and have faulty wisdom; I shall not have faulty wisdom.” Cunda, just as a wrong path has the right path as its opposite, and just as an uneven ford has an even ford as its opposite, in the same way, Cunda, evil desire has as its opposite lack of evil desire. Harmful intent and anger has as its opposite absence of harmful intent and anger. Killing living beings,... taking what is not given,... not being celibate has as its opposite being celibate. Covetousness,... disputatiousness,... sloth-and-torpor,... restlessness,... arrogance,... doubt has as its oppo site absence of doubt. The fetter of ill-will,... flattery,... deceit,... lack of shame and scruples has as its opposite the presence of shame and scruples. Conceit has as its opposite absence of conceit. Overbearing pride has as its opposite absence of overbearing pride. Little learning has as its opposite much learning. Not contemplating wholesome states has as its opposite contemplating wholesome states. Evil conduct contrary to the Dharma has as its opposite sublime conduct according to the Dharma. False speech,... divisive speech,... harsh speech,... frivolous speech,... and evil behavior has as its opposite abstaining from evil behavior. Lacking faith,... being negligent,... lack ing mindfulness,... lacking samādhi,... having faulty wisdom has as its opposite wholesome wisdom. Cunda, there are dark states that produce dark results and lead [down ward to] bad realms of existence; and there are bright states that produce bright results and lead upward. Thus, Cunda, a person given to evil desires is led upward by the absence of evil desires. One given to harmful intent and anger is led upward by the absence of harmful intent and anger.

One given to killing living beings,... taking what is not given,... not being celibate is led upward by being celibate. One given to covetous- ness,... disputatiousness,... sloth-and-torpor,... restlessness,... arro- gance,... doubt is led upward by absence of doubt. One given to the fetter of ill-will,... to flattery,... to deceit,... to lack of shame and scruples is led upward by the presence of shame and scruples. One given to conceit is led upward by the absence of conceit. One given to overbearing pride is led upward by the absence of overbearing pride. One with little learning is led upward by much learning. One given to not contemplating wholesome states is led upward by contemplating wholesome states. One given to evil conduct contrary to the Dharma is led upward by sub- lime conduct according to the Dharma. One given to false speech,... divi- sive speech,... harsh speech,... frivolous speech,... evil behavior is led upward by abstaining from evil behavior. One who lacks faith,... is negligent,... lacks mindfulness,... lacks samādhi,... has faulty wisdom is led upward by wholesome wisdom. Cunda, if one is not tamed oneself, it is impossible to tame another who is not tamed. If one is drowning oneself, it is impossible to rescue another who is drowning. If one has not extinguished [defilements] oneself, it is impossible to cause another who has not extinguished [defilements] to extinguish them.^176 Cunda, if one is tamed oneself, it is possible to tame another who is not tamed. If one is not drowning oneself, it is possible to save another who is drowning. If one has extinguished [defilements] oneself, it is possible to cause another who has not extinguished [defilements] to extinguish them. In this way, Cunda, one given to evil desires can extinguish them through the absence of evil desires. One given to harmful intent and anger can extinguish it through the absence of harmful intent and anger. One given to killing living beings,... taking what is not given,... not being celibate can extinguish it through being celibate. One given to cov- etousness,... disputatiousness,... sloth-and-torpor,... restlessness,... arrogance,... doubt can extinguish it through absence of doubt. One given to the fetter of ill-will,... to flattery,... to deceit,... to lack of shame and scruples can extinguish it through having shame and scruples.

One given to conceit can extinguish it through being without conceit. One given to overbearing pride can extinguish it through being without overbearing pride. One with little learning can extinguish it through much learning. One given to not contemplating wholesome states can extinguish it through contemplating wholesome states. One given to evil conduct contrary to the Dharma can extinguish it through sublime conduct according to the Dharma. One given to false speech,... divisive speech,... harsh speech,... frivolous speech,... evil behavior can extinguish it through abstaining from evil behavior. One who lacks faith,... is negligent,... lacks mindfulness,... lacks con centration,... has faulty wisdom can extinguish it through having whole some wisdom. In this way, Cunda, I have taught you the way of effacement. I have taught you the way of inclining the mind. I have taught you the way of opposites. I have taught you the way that leads upward. I have taught you the way to extinction. What a teacher should do for his disciples out of great compassion, mercy, sympathy, and concern, seeking their benefit and welfare, seeking their safety and happiness—that I have now already done. You too should do your part. Go and sit in meditation and contemplation in a secluded place, on a mountain, in a forest, at the base of a tree, in an empty and quiet place. Do not be negligent. Make diligent effort, lest you regret it later. This is my instruction, this is my teaching. Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, Venerable Mahācunda and the [other] monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma91-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA47.9]] | M i 320 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA87]], [[MA93]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA91]]
> ◄  [[ma90-bdk]] 📜  [[ma92-bdk]] ►
