---
sutta_code: "MA98"
sutta_title:
  - "念處 "
  - "Mindfulness Establishment"
sutta-version: "BDK"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA98]]
> ◄  [[ma97-bdk]] 📜  [[ma99-bdk]] ►

### 98. The Discourse on the Establishments of Mindfulness

Establishments of Mindfulness^215 Thus have I heard. At one time the Buddha was staying among the Kurus, at a Kuru town called Kammāsadhamma. At that time the World-honored One addressed the monks: There is one path for the purification of beings, for going beyond sorrow and fear, for eradicating suffering and distress, for abandoning weeping and tears, for attaining the true Dharma, namely the four establishments of mindfulness. If there were tathāgatas of the past, free from attachment and fully awakened, they all attained realization of unsurpassable and complete awakening by abandoning the five hindrances that defile the mind and weaken wisdom, by dwelling with the mind well settled in the four establishments of mindfulness, and by developing the seven factors of awakening.^216 If there will be tathāgatas of the future, free from attachment and fully awakened, they will all attain realization of unsurpassable and complete awakening by abandoning the five hindrances that defile the mind and weaken wisdom, by dwelling with the mind well settled in the four establishments of mindfulness, and by developing the seven factors of awakening.

I now, being the tathāgata of the present, free from attachment and fully awakened, have attained realization of unsurpassable and complete awakening by abandoning the five hindrances that defile the mind and weaken wisdom, by dwelling with the mind well settled in the four establishments of mind- fulness, and by developing the seven factors of awakening. What are the four [establishments of mindfulness]? [They are] the estab- lishment of mindfulness by contemplating the body as body; and similarly the establishment of mindfulness by contemplating feelings,... [states of] mind,... and dharmas as dharmas.^217 What is the establishment of mindfulness by contemplating the body as body?^218 When walking, a monk knows he is walking; when standing, he knows he is standing; when sitting, he knows he is sitting; when lying down, he knows he is lying down; when falling asleep, he knows he is falling asleep; when waking up, he knows he is waking up; when falling asleep or waking up, he knows he is falling asleep or waking up.^219 In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally.^220 He sets up mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pen- etration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. When going out and coming in, a monk clearly knows, contemplates, and discerns [this action] well; [when] bending or stretching [his limbs], when lowering or raising [his head], he does so with appropriate deportment; when wearing his outer robe and other robes and [carrying his] bowl, he does so properly; when walking, standing, sitting, lying down, [falling] asleep, waking up, speaking, and keeping silent—all [these activities] he clearly knows.^221 In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene- tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. [When] evil and unwholesome thoughts arise, a monk controls, abandons, eradicates, and stops them by recollecting wholesome dharmas.^222 It is just as a carpenter or a carpenter’s apprentice might apply an inked string to a piece of wood [to mark a straight line] and then cut the wood

with a sharp adze to make it straight.^223 In the same way, [when] evil unwholesome thoughts arise, a monk controls, abandons, eradicates, and stops them by recollecting wholesome dharmas. In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. With teeth clenched and tongue pressed against his palate, a monk uses [the will-power of his own] mind to control his mind, to control, abandon, eradicate, and stop [evil thoughts]. It is just as two strong men might seize a weaker man and shoving him this way and that, they beat him up as they wish. In the same way, with teeth clenched and tongue pressed against his palate, a monk uses [the will-power of his own] mind to control his mind, to control, abandon, eradicate, and stop [evil thoughts]. In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body: A monk is mindful of breathing in and knows he is breathing in mindfully; he is mindful of breathing out and knows he is breathing out mindfully. [When] breathing in long, he knows he is breathing in long; [when] breathing out long, he knows he is breathing out long. [When] breathing in short, he knows he is breathing in short; [when] breathing out short, he knows he is breathing out short. He trains [in experiencing] the whole body when breathing in; he trains [in experiencing] the whole body when breathing out. He trains in calming bodily activities when breathing in; he trains in calming <bodily> activities when breathing out.^224 In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body.

Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. A monk completely drenches and pervades his body from within with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion [experienced in the first absorption], so that there is no part [of his body] that is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.^225 It is just as a bath attendant, having filled a vessel with bathing powder, might mix it with water and knead it so that no part of [the powder] is not completely drenched and pervaded with water. In the same way, a monk completely drenches and pervades his body from within with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, so that there is no part [of his body] that is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene- tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. A monk completely drenches and pervades his body from within with rapture and pleasure born of samādhi [experienced in the second absorption], so that there is no part [of his body] that is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of samādhi. It is just like a mountain spring that is full and overflowing with clear, clean water so that water coming from any of the four directions cannot enter it, with springwater welling up from the bottom on its own, flowing out and flooding the surroundings, completely drenching and pervading every part of the mountain. In the same way, a monk completely drenches and pervades his body from within with rapture and pleasure born of con- centration so that there is no part [of his body] that is not pervaded by rapture and pleasure born of samādhi. In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene- tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. A monk completely drenches and pervades his body from within with pleasure born of the absence of rapture [experienced in the third absorption], so that there is

no part [of his body] that is not pervaded by pleasure born of the absence of rapture. It is just as a blue, red, or white lotus that is born in the water and has come to full growth in the water, remains submerged in the water with every part of its roots, stem, flower, and leaves completely drenched and pervaded [by it], with no part that is not pervaded by [the water]. In the same way, a monk completely drenches and pervades his body from within with pleasure born of the absence of rapture so that there is no part [of his body] that is not pervaded by pleasure born of the absence of rapture. In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. A monk mentally resolves to dwell having accomplished a complete pervasion of his body from within with mental purity [experienced in the fourth absorption], so that there is no part [of his body] that is not pervaded by mental purity. It is just as a person might cover himself from head to foot with a cloth measuring seven or eight units, so that every part of his body is covered. In the same way, a monk completely pervades his body from within with mental purity [experienced in the fourth absorption], so that there is no part [of his body] that is not pervaded by mental purity. In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. A monk is mindful of the perception of light ( ālokasaññā ), properly taking hold of it, properly retaining it, and recollecting it properly with mindfulness, [so that] what is behind is like what is in front, what is in front is like what is behind, night is like day, day is like night, what is above is like what is below, and what is below is like what is above. In this way, he develops an undis torted and undefiled state of mind that is bright and clear, a state of mind that is totally unobscured by impediments.^226

In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness of the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene- tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. A monk properly grasps the reviewing sign,^227 recollecting it properly with mindfulness. It is just as someone who is seated might contemplate another person who is lying down, or while lying down might contemplate someone who is seated. In the same way, a monk properly grasps the reviewing sign, recollecting it properly with mindfulness. In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He establishes mindfulness in the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pen- etration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. A monk contemplates this body from head to foot, according to its position and according to its attractive and repulsive [qualities], as full of various kinds of impurities, [reflecting]: “Within this body of mine there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, rough and smooth epidermis, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, heart, kid- neys, liver, lungs, large intestine, small intestine, spleen, stomach, feces, brain and brain stem, tears, sweat, mucus, saliva, pus, blood, fat, marrow, phlegm, bile, and urine.” It is just as a person endowed with eyesight, on seeing a vessel full of various seeds, might clearly distinguish them all, identifying them as rice seeds, millet seeds, turnip seeds, or mustard seeds.^228 In the same way, a monk contemplates this body from head to foot, according to its position and according to its attractive and repulsive [qualities], as full of various kinds of impurities, [reflecting]: “Within this body of mine there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, rough and smooth epidermis, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, large intestine, small intestine, spleen, stomach, feces, brain and brain stem, tears, sweat, mucus, saliva, pus, blood, fat, marrow, phlegm, bile, and urine.” In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness of the

body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. A monk contemplates the body [as made up of] elements: “Within this body of mine there is the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element, and the consciousness element.”^229 It is just as a butcher, having slaughtered and skinned a cow, might divide it into six parts and spread them on the ground [to display them for sale]. In the same way a monk contemplates the body [as made up of] elements: “Within this body of mine there is the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element, and the consciousness element.” In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness of the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. A monk contemplates a corpse that has been dead for one, two, or up to six or seven days, which is being pecked at by crows, devoured by jackals and wolves, burned by fire, or buried in the earth,^230 or that is completely rotten and decomposed. Seeing this, he compares himself to it: “This present body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness of the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. Just as he has formerly seen [a corpse] in a charnel ground, [so] the monk [recollects] a carcass of bluish color, decomposed and half eaten [by animals], the bones lying on the ground still connected together. Seeing this, he compares himself to it: “This present body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness of the

body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene- tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. Just as he has formerly seen [a skeleton] in a charnel ground, [so] a monk [recollects it] without skin, flesh, or blood, held together only by sinews. Seeing it, he compares himself to it: “This present body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness of the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene- tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. Just as he has formerly seen [bones] in a charnel ground, [so] a monk [recollects] disconnected bones that have been scattered in all directions: foot bones, shin bones, thigh bones, a hip bone, vertebrae, shoulder bones, neck bones, and a skull, all in different places. Seeing this, he compares himself to it: “This present body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness of the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene- tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. Again, a monk contemplates the body as body. Just as he has formerly seen [bones] in a charnel ground, [so] a monk [recollects] bones that are white like shells, or bluish like the color of a pigeon, or red as if smeared with blood, rotting and decomposing, crumbling to dust. Seeing this, he compares himself to it: “This present body of mine is also like this. It is of the same nature and in the end cannot escape [this fate].” In this way a monk contemplates the body as body internally [or] he contemplates the body as body externally. He sets up mindfulness of the body and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and pene- tration. This is [how] a monk contemplates the body as body. If a monk or nun contemplates the body in this way for even a short time, then this is what is meant by the establishment of mindfulness by contemplating the body as body.^231

What is the establishment of mindfulness by contemplating feelings as feelings? When experiencing a pleasant feeling, a monk knows he is experiencing a pleasant feeling; when experiencing a painful feeling, he knows he is experiencing a painful feeling; when experiencing a neutral feeling, he knows he is experiencing a neutral feeling; when experiencing a pleasant bodily feeling, he knows he is experiencing a pleasant bodily [feeling], [when experiencing] a painful bodily [feeling],... a neutral bodily [feeling],... a pleasant mental [feeling],... a painful mental [feel ing]... a neutral mental [feeling],... a pleasant worldly [feeling],... a painful worldly [feeling],... a neutral worldly [feeling],... a pleasant unworldly [feeling],... a painful unworldly [feeling],... a neutral unworldly [feeling],... a pleasant [feeling related to] sensuality,... a painful [feeling related to] sensuality,... a neutral [feeling related to] sensuality,... a pleasant [feeling not related to] sensuality,... a painful [feeling not related to] sensuality... ; when [experiencing] a neutral [feel ing not related to] sensuality, he knows he is experiencing a neutral feeling not related to sensuality.^232 In this way a monk contemplates feelings as feelings internally [or] he contemplates feelings as feelings externally. He sets up mindfulness of feelings and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and penetration. This is [how] a monk contemplates feelings as feelings. If a monk or nun contemplates feelings in this way for even a short time, then this is what is meant by the establishment of mindfulness by contemplating feelings as feelings. What is the establishment of mindfulness by contemplating states of mind as states of mind? A monk knows, as it really is, a state of mind with desire to be a state of mind with desire; he knows, as it really is, a state of mind without desire to be a state of mind without desire; [he knows, as it really is, a state of mind] with hatred,... [a state of mind] without hatred,... [a state of mind] with delusion,... [a state of mind] without delusion,... a defiled [state of mind],... an undefiled [state of mind],... a contracted [state of mind],... a distracted [state of mind],... an inferior [state of mind],... a superior [state of mind],... a narrow [state of mind],... a broad [state of mind],... a developed [state of mind],... an undeveloped [state of mind],... a collected [state of mind],...

an uncollected [state of mind]... ; he knows, as it really is, an unlib- erated [state of mind] to be an unliberated state of mind; he knows, as it really is, a liberated [state of mind] to be a liberated [state of mind].^233 In this way a monk contemplates states of mind as states of mind internally [or] he contemplates states of mind as states of mind externally. He sets up mindfulness of states of mind and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and penetration. This is [how] a monk contemplates states of mind as states of mind. If a monk or nun contemplates states of mind in this way for even a short time, then this is what is meant by the establishment of mindfulness by contemplating states of mind as states of mind. What is the establishment of mindfulness by contemplating dharmas as dharmas?^234 In dependence on the eye and forms, an internal fetter [may] arise. [When such] an internal fetter is actually present, a monk knows, as it really is, that an internal fetter is present; [when] an internal fetter is actually absent, a monk knows, as it really is, that an internal fetter is absent; he knows, as it really is, how an unarisen internal fetter arises; he knows, as it really is, how an arisen internal fetter ceases and does not arise again.^235 In the same way for the ear,... the nose,... the tongue,... the body,... In dependence on the mind and mind objects an internal fetter [may] arise. [When such] an internal fetter is actually present, a monk knows, as it really is, that an internal fetter is present; [when] an internal fetter is actually absent, he knows, as it really is, that an internal fetter is absent; he knows, as it really is, how an unarisen internal fetter arises; he knows, as it really is, how an arisen internal fetter ceases and does not arise again. In this way a monk contemplates dharmas as dharmas internally [or] he contemplates dharmas as dharmas externally. He sets up mindfulness of dharmas and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and penetration. This is [how] a monk contemplates dharmas as dharmas, namely [in relation] to the six internal [sense] spheres. Again, a monk contemplates dharmas as dharmas. [When] sensual desire is actually present internally, a monk knows, as it really is, that sensual desire is present; [when] sensual desire is actually absent internally, he knows, as it really is, that sensual desire is absent; he knows, as it really

is, how unarisen sensual desire arises; he knows, as it really is, how arisen sensual desire ceases and does not arise again. In the same way for anger,... sloth-and-torpor,... restlessness-and worry.... [When] doubt is actually present internally, a monk knows, as it really is, that doubt is present; [when] doubt is actually absent internally, he knows, as it really is, that doubt is absent; he knows, as it really is, how unarisen doubt arises; he knows, as it really is, how arisen doubt ceases and does not arise again. In this way a monk contemplates dharmas as dharmas internally [or] he contemplates dharmas as dharmas externally. He sets up mindfulness of dharmas and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and penetration. This is [how] a monk contemplates dharmas as dharmas, namely [in relation to] the five hindrances. Again, a monk contemplates dharmas as dharmas. [When] the awakening factor of mindfulness is actually present internally, a monk knows, as it really is, that the awakening factor of mindfulness is present; [when] the awakening factor of mindfulness is actually absent internally, he knows, as it really is, that the awakening factor of mindfulness is absent; he knows, as it really is, how the unarisen awakening factor of mindfulness arises; he knows, as it really is, how the arisen awakening factor of mindfulness is maintained with out loss or deterioration, and how it is further developed and increased. In the same way for investigation of dharmas,^236... energy,... joy,... tranquility,... samādhi.... [When] the awakening factor of equa nimity is actually present internally, a monk knows, as it really is, that the awakening factor of equanimity is present; [when] the awakening factor of equanimity is actually absent internally, he knows, as it really is, that the awakening factor of equanimity is absent; he knows, as it really is, how the unarisen awakening factor of equanimity arises; he knows, as it really is, how the arisen awakening factor of equanimity is maintained without loss or deterioration, and how it is further developed and increased. In this way a monk contemplates dharmas as dharmas internally [or] he contemplates dharmas as dharmas externally. He sets up mindfulness of dharmas and is endowed with knowledge, vision, understanding, and penetration. This is [how] a monk contemplates dharmas as dharmas, namely [in relation] to the seven factors of awakening. If a monk or nun

contemplates dharmas in this way even for a short time, then this is reck- oned to be the establishment of mindfulness by contemplating dharmas as dharmas. If a monk or a nun with settled mind properly maintains the four estab- lishments of mindfulness for seven years, then he or she will certainly attain [one of] two fruits: either final knowledge here and now or, if there is a remainder [of clinging], the attainment of nonreturning. Let alone seven years,... six [years],... five [years],... four [years],... three [years],... two [years],... [or] one year, if a monk or a nun with settled mind properly maintains the four establishments of mindfulness for seven months, then he or she will certainly attain [one of] two fruits: either final knowledge here and now or, if there is a remainder [of clinging], the attain- ment of nonreturning. Let alone seven months,... six [months],... five [months],... four [months],... three [months],... two [months],... [or] one month, if a monk or a nun with settled mind properly maintains the four establishments of mindfulness for seven days and nights, he or she will certainly attain one of two fruits: either final knowledge here and now or, if there is a remainder [of clinging], the attainment of nonreturning. Let alone seven days and nights,... six [days and nights],... five [days and nights],... four [days and nights],... three [days and nights],... two [days and nights],... [or] one day and night, if a monk or a nun with settled mind properly maintains the four establishments of mindfulness even for a short moment, then, practicing in this way in the morning, he or she will certainly have made progress by the evening of the same day, [or] practicing in this way in the evening, he or she will certainly have made progress by the [next] morning.^237 Thus spoke the Buddha. Having heard what the Buddha said, the monks were delighted and received it respectfully.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:ma98-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA12.1]], [[EA27.1]], [[MA31]], [[MA81]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[DA22]], [[MN36]], [[SN35.120]], [[DN2]], [[DN3]], [[DN5]], [[DN6]], [[DN7]], [[DN8]], [[DN9]], [[DN10]], [[DN11]], [[DN12]], [[DN13]], [[MN27]], [[MN38]], [[MN51]], [[MN53]], [[MN60]], [[MN76]], [[MN79]], [[MN94]], [[MN101]], [[MN107]], [[MN112]], [[AN4.14]], [[AN4.165]], [[AN4.198]], [[AN5.76]], [[AN5.140]], [[AN10.99]], [[AN11.17]], [[MN39]], [[SN35.127]], [[SN35.240]], [[AN3.16]], [[AN4.37]], [[MN33]], [[MN95]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MA81]], [[MN118]], [[MN119]], [[SN47]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[MA]]  / 🌐 [[MA98]]
> ◄  [[ma97-bdk]] 📜  [[ma99-bdk]] ►
