---
sutta_code: "SN21.9"
sutta_title:
  - "Tissasutta "
  - "Tissa"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.9]]
> ◄  [[sn21.8-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn21.10-thanissaro]] ►

## SN21.9 Tissa

## ## Tissa Sutta


I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. Then Ven. Tissa, the Blessed One’s paternal cousin, went to the Blessed One and, having bowed down to him, sat to one side—miserable, unhappy, shedding tears. So the Blessed One said to him, “Tissa, why are you sitting to one side—miserable, unhappy, shedding tears?”

“Because, lord, monks on all sides attack me with piercing words.”

“But that, Tissa, is because you’re one who admonishes but can’t stand being admonished. It’s not proper for you—a clansman who has gone forth through conviction from the home life into homelessness—that you’re one who admonishes but can’t stand being admonished. This is what’s proper for you—a clansman who has gone forth through conviction from the home life into homelessness: that you be one who admonishes and can stand being admonished.”

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-Gone, the Teacher, said further:

Why are you angry? Don’t be angry.

Non-anger, Tissa, is best for you.

It’s for the sake of subduing

anger, conceit, & contempt, Tissa,

that the holy life is lived.

See also: [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.84-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an5/an5.75-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an5/an5.76-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an5/an5.139-thanissaro]]; [[dhp76-thanissaro]]; Sg 12

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn21.9-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.7]], [[SA1068]] | S ii 281 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.7]], [[SA1068]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[DHP\|DHP-AI115-22]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN21]]  / 🌐 [[SN21.9]]
> ◄  [[sn21.8-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn21.10-thanissaro]] ►
