---
sutta_code: "SN48.49"
sutta_title:
  - "Piṇḍolabhāradvājasutta "
  - "Piṇḍola"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.49]]
> ◄  [[sn48.48-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.50-bodhi]] ►

# SN48.49 Piṇḍola

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park. Now on that occasion the Venerable Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja had declared final knowledge thus: “I understand: Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.”

Then a number of bhikkhus approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Venerable sir, the Venerable Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja has declared final knowledge thus: ‘I understand: Destroyed is birth….’ Considering what reason has the Venerable Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja declared final knowledge thus?”

“It is, bhikkhus, because he has developed and cultivated three faculties that the bhikkhu Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja has declared final knowledge thus. What are those three? The faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of samādhi, the faculty of wisdom. It is because he has developed and cultivated these three faculties that the bhikkhu Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja has declared final knowledge thus.

“In what, bhikkhus, do these three faculties end? They end in destruction. End in the destruction of what? Of birth, aging, and death. Considering that they end in the destruction of birth, aging, and death, \[225\] the bhikkhu Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja has declared final knowledge thus: ‘I understand: Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.49-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 224 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.49]]
> ◄  [[sn48.48-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.50-bodhi]] ►
