---
sutta_code: "SN48.40"
sutta_title:
  - "Uppaṭipāṭikasutta "
  - "Irregular Order"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.40]]
> ◄  [[sn48.39-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.41-bodhi]] ►

# SN48.40 Irregular Order

“Bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The pleasure faculty … the equanimity faculty.

### (i. The pain faculty)

“Here, bhikkhus, while a bhikkhu is dwelling diligent, ardent, and resolute, there arises in him the pain faculty. He understands thus: ‘There has arisen in me this pain faculty. That has a basis, a source, a causal formation, a condition. It is impossible for that pain faculty to arise without a basis, without a source, without a causal formation, without a condition.’ He understands the pain faculty; he understands the origin of the pain faculty; he understands the cessation of the pain faculty; and he understands where the arisen pain faculty ceases without remainder.

“And where does the arisen pain faculty cease without remainder?  Here, bhikkhus, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by thought and examination, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion. And it is here that the arisen pain faculty ceases without remainder.

“This, bhikkhus, is called a bhikkhu who has understood the cessation of the pain faculty. He directs his mind accordingly.

### (ii. The displeasure faculty)

“Here, bhikkhus, while a bhikkhu is dwelling diligent, ardent, and resolute, there arises in him the displeasure faculty. \[214\] He understands thus: ‘There has arisen in me this displeasure faculty. That has a basis, a source, a causal formation, a condition. It is impossible for that displeasure faculty to arise without a basis, without a source, without a causal formation, without a condition. ’ He understands the displeasure faculty; he understands the origin of the displeasure faculty; he understands the cessation of the displeasure faculty; and he understands where the arisen displeasure faculty ceases without remainder.

“And where does the arisen displeasure faculty cease without remainder? With the subsiding of thought and examination, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has internal confidence and unification of mind, is without thought and examination, and has rapture and happiness born of samādhi. And it is here that the arisen displeasure faculty ceases without remainder.

“This, bhikkhus, is called a bhikkhu who has understood the cessation of the displeasure faculty. He directs his mind accordingly.

### (iii. The pleasure faculty)

“Here, bhikkhus, while a bhikkhu is dwelling diligent, ardent, and resolute, there arises in him the pleasure faculty. He understands thus: ‘There has arisen in me this pleasure faculty. That has a basis, a source, a causal formation, a condition. It is impossible for that pleasure faculty to arise without a basis, without a source, without a causal formation, without a condition.’ He understands the pleasure faculty; he understands the origin of the pleasure faculty; he understands the cessation of the pleasure faculty; and he understands where the arisen pleasure faculty ceases without remainder.

“And where does the arisen pleasure faculty cease without remainder? With the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu dwells equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, experiences happiness with the body; he enters and dwells in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’ And it is here that the arisen pleasure faculty ceases without remainder.

“This, bhikkhus, is called a bhikkhu who has understood the cessation of the pleasure faculty. He directs his mind accordingly. \[215\]

### (iv. The joy faculty)

“Here, bhikkhus, while a bhikkhu is dwelling diligent, ardent, and resolute, there arises in him the joy faculty. He understands thus: ‘There has arisen in me this joy faculty. That has a basis, a source, a causal formation, a condition. It is impossible for that joy faculty to arise without a basis, without a source, without a causal formation, without a condition.’ He understands the joy faculty; he understands the origin of the joy faculty; he understands the cessation of the joy faculty; and he understands where the arisen joy faculty ceases without remainder.

“And where does the arisen joy faculty cease without remainder? With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and displeasure, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, which is neither painful nor pleasant and includes the purification of mindfulness by equanimity. And it is here that the arisen joy faculty ceases without remainder.

“This, bhikkhus, is called a bhikkhu who has understood the cessation of the joy faculty. He directs his mind accordingly.

### (v. The equanimity faculty)

“Here, bhikkhus, while a bhikkhu is dwelling diligent, ardent, and resolute, there arises in him the equanimity faculty. He understands thus: ‘There has arisen in me this equanimity faculty. That has a basis, a source, a causal formation, a condition. It is impossible for that equanimity faculty to arise without a basis, without a source, without a causal formation, without a condition. ’ He understands the equanimity faculty; he understands the origin of the equanimity faculty; he understands the cessation of the equanimity faculty; and he understands where the arisen equanimity faculty ceases without remainder.

“And where does the arisen equanimity faculty cease without remainder? Here, bhikkhus, having completely transcended the base of neither-perception-nor-nonperception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling. And it is here that the arisen equanimity faculty ceases without remainder.

“This, bhikkhus, is called a bhikkhu \[216\] who has understood the cessation of the equanimity faculty. He directs his mind accordingly.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.40-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 213 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.40]]
> ◄  [[sn48.39-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.41-bodhi]] ►
