---
sutta_code: "SN48.52"
sutta_title:
  - "Mallikasutta "
  - "Mallikas"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.52]]
> ◄  [[sn48.51-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.53-bodhi]] ►

# SN48.52 Mallikas

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Mallikas, where there was a town of the Mallikas named Uruvelakappa. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:

“Bhikkhus, so long as noble knowledge has not arisen in the noble disciple, there is as yet no stability of the \[other\] four faculties, no steadiness of the \[other\] four faculties. But when noble knowledge has arisen in the noble disciple, then there is stability of the \[other\] four faculties, then there is steadiness of the \[other\] four faculties.

“It is, bhikkhus, just as in a house with a peaked roof: so long as the roof peak has not been set in place, there is as yet no stability of the rafters, there is as yet no steadiness of the rafters; but when the roof peak has been set in place, then there is stability of the rafters, then there is steadiness of the rafters. So too, bhikkhus, so long as noble knowledge has not arisen in the noble disciple, there is as yet no stability of the \[other\] four faculties, no steadiness of the \[other\] four faculties. But when noble knowledge has arisen in the noble disciple, then there is stability of the \[other\] four faculties, then there is steadiness of the \[other\] four faculties.

“What four? \[229\] The faculty of faith, the faculty of energy, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of samādhi. In the case of a noble disciple who possesses wisdom, the faith that follows from it becomes stable; the energy that follows from it becomes stable; the mindfulness that follows from it becomes stable; the samādhi that follows from it becomes stable.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.52-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA654]], [[SA655-658]] | S v 228 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA655-658]], [[SA654]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.52]]
> ◄  [[sn48.51-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.53-bodhi]] ►
