---
sutta_code: "SN48.57"
sutta_title:
  - "Sahampatibrahmasutta "
  - "Brahma Sahampati"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.57]]
> ◄  [[sn48.56-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.58-bodhi]] ►

# SN48.57 Brahmā Sahampati

On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Uruvelā on the bank of the river Nerañjarā at the foot of the Goatherd’s Banyan Tree just after he had become fully enlightened. Then, while the Blessed One was alone in seclusion, a reflection arose in his mind thus: “The five faculties, when developed and cultivated, have the Deathless as their ground, the Deathless as their destination, the Deathless as their final goal. What five? The faculty of faith, the faculty of energy, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of samādhi, the faculty of wisdom. These five faculties, when developed and cultivated, have the Deathless as their ground, the Deathless as their destination, the Deathless as their final goal.” \[233\]

Then Brahmā Sahampati, having known with his own mind the reflection in the Blessed One’s mind, just as quickly as a strong man might extend his drawn-in arm or draw in his extended arm, disappeared from the brahmā world and reappeared before the Blessed One. He arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, extended his joined hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One, and said to him: “So it is, Blessed One! So it is, Fortunate One! Venerable sir, the five faculties … (all as above) … have the Deathless as their final goal.

“Once in the past, venerable sir, I lived the holy life under the Perfectly Enlightened One Kassapa. There they knew me as the bhikkhu Sahaka. By having developed and cultivated these same five faculties, venerable sir, I eliminated desire for sensual pleasures and thus, with the breakup of the body, after death, I was reborn in a good destination, in the brahmā world. There they know me as Brahmā Sahampati. So it is, Blessed One! So it is, Fortunate One! I know this, I see this: how these five faculties, when developed and cultivated, have the Deathless as their ground, the Deathless as their destination, the Deathless as their final goal.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.57-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 232 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.57]]
> ◄  [[sn48.56-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.58-bodhi]] ►
