---
sutta_code: "SN48.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭilābhasutta "
  - "Obtainment"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.11]]
> ◄  [[sn48.10-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.12-bodhi]] ►

# SN48.11 Obtainment

“Bhikkhus, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculty of faith … the faculty of wisdom.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of faith? Here, bhikkhus, the noble disciple is a person of faith, one who places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’ This is called the faculty of faith.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of energy? The energy that one obtains on the basis of the four right strivings. This is called the faculty of energy. \[200\]

“And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of mindfulness? The mindfulness that one obtains on the basis of the four establishments of mindfulness. This is called the faculty of mindfulness.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of samādhi? Here, bhikkhus, the noble disciple gains samādhi, gains one-pointedness of mind, having made release the object. This is called the faculty of samādhi.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of wisdom? Here, bhikkhus, the noble disciple is wise; he possesses wisdom directed to arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative, leading to the complete destruction of suffering. This is called the faculty of wisdom.

“These, bhikkhus, are the five faculties.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 199 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN8.30.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.11]]
> ◄  [[sn48.10-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.12-bodhi]] ►
