---
sutta_code: "SN48.43"
sutta_title:
  - "Sāketasutta "
  - "Saketa"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.43]]
> ◄  [[sn48.42-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.44-bodhi]] ►

# SN48.43 Sāketa

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāketa in the Añjana Grove, in the Deer Park. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:

“Bhikkhus, is there a method of exposition by means of which the five faculties become the five powers and the five powers become the five faculties?”

“Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One. It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement. Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will remember it.”…

“There is a method of exposition, bhikkhus, by means of which the five faculties become the five powers and the five powers become the five faculties. And what is that method of exposition? That which is the faculty of faith is the power of faith; that which is the power of faith is the faculty of faith. That which is the faculty of energy is the power of energy; that which is the power of energy is the faculty of energy. That which is the faculty of mindfulness is the power of mindfulness; that which is the power of mindfulness is the faculty of mindfulness. That which is the faculty of samādhi is the power of samādhi; that which is the power of samādhi is the faculty of samādhi. That which is the faculty of wisdom is the power of wisdom; that which is the power of wisdom is the faculty of wisdom.

“Suppose, bhikkhus, there is a river which slants, slopes, and inclines towards the east, with an island in the middle. There is a method of exposition by means of which that river could be considered to have one stream, but there is a method of exposition by means of which it could be considered to have two streams. \[220\]

“And what is the method of exposition by means of which that river could be considered to have one stream? Taking into account the water to the east of the island and the water to its west—this is the method of exposition by means of which that river could be considered to have one stream.

“And what is the method of exposition by means of which that river could be considered to have two streams? Taking into account the water to the north of the island and the water to the south—this is the method of exposition by means of which that river could be considered to have two streams.

“So too, bhikkhus, that which is the faculty of faith is the power of faith … that which is the power of wisdom is the faculty of wisdom.

“It is, bhikkhus, because he has developed and cultivated these five faculties that a bhikkhu, by the destruction of the taints, in this very life enters and dwells in the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, realizing it for himself with direct knowledge.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn48.43-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 219 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN48]]  / 🌐 [[SN48.43]]
> ◄  [[sn48.42-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn48.44-bodhi]] ►
