---
sutta_code: "SN35.18"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyanoceassādasutta "
  - "If There Were No (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.18]]
> ◄  [[sn35.17-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.19-thanissaro]] ►

## SN35.18 If There Were Not This (2)

## ## No Cedaṁ Sutta


“Monks, if there were not this allure to forms, beings would not become impassioned with forms. But because there is an allure to forms, beings become impassioned with forms.

“If there were not these drawbacks to forms, beings would not become disenchanted with forms. But because there are drawbacks to forms, beings become disenchanted with forms.

“If there were not this escape from forms, beings would not escape from forms. But because there is an escape from forms, beings escape from forms.

“If there were not this allure to sounds…

“If there were not this allure to aromas…

“If there were not this allure to flavors…

“If there were not this allure to tactile sensations…

“If there were not this allure to ideas, beings would not become impassioned with ideas. But because there is an allure to ideas, beings become impassioned with ideas.

“If there were not these drawbacks to ideas, beings would not become disenchanted with ideas. But because there are drawbacks to ideas, beings become disenchanted with ideas.

“If there were not this escape from ideas, beings would not escape from ideas. But because there is an escape from ideas, beings escape from ideas.

“And, monks, as long as beings don’t know as it has come to be—with regard to these six external sense media—the allure as the allure, the drawbacks as the drawbacks, and the escape as the escape, they have not escaped from this cosmos with its devas, Māras, & Brahmās, this generation with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk, nor do they dwell disjoined from it, released from it, with unrestricted awareness.

“But when beings know as it has come to be—with regard to these six external sense media—the allure as the allure, the drawbacks as the drawbacks, and the escape as the escape, they have escaped from this cosmos with its devas, Māras, & Brahmās, this generation with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk, and they dwell disjoined from it, released from it, with unrestricted awareness.”

See also: [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.57-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.60-thanissaro]]; [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.82-thanissaro]]; [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.116-thanissaro]]; [[an10.81-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.18-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA243]] | S iv 12 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA243]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.18]]
> ◄  [[sn35.17-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.19-thanissaro]] ►
