---
sutta_code: "SN35.116"
sutta_title:
  - "Lokantagamanasutta "
  - "Going to the End of the World"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.116]]
> ◄  [[sn35.115-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.117-thanissaro]] ►

## SN35.116 Cosmos

## ## Loka Sutta


“Monks, I don’t say that one would know, see, or reach the end of the cosmos by traveling. But I also don’t say that there is a putting an end to stress without reaching the end of the cosmos.”

Having said this, the Blessed One got up from his seat and went into his dwelling.

Then, not long after the Blessed One had left, this thought occurred to the monks: “This brief statement the Blessed One made, after which he went into his dwelling without analyzing the detailed meaning—i.e., ‘Monks, I don’t say that one would know, see, or reach the end of the cosmos by traveling. But I also don’t say that there is a putting an end to stress without reaching the end of the cosmos’: now who might analyze the unanalyzed detailed meaning of this brief statement?” Then the thought occurred to them, “Ven. Ānanda is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his observant companions in the holy life. He is capable of analyzing the unanalyzed detailed meaning of this brief statement. Suppose we were to go to him and, on arrival, cross-question him about this matter.”

So the monks went to Ven. Ānanda and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him. After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, they sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they [told him what had happened, and added,] “Analyze the meaning, Ven. Ānanda!”

[He replied:] “Friends, it’s as if a man needing heartwood, looking for heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood—passing over the root & trunk of a standing tree possessing heartwood—were to imagine that heartwood should be sought among its branches & leaves. So it is with you, who—having bypassed the Blessed One when you were face to face with him, the Teacher—imagine that I should be asked about this matter. For knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees. He is the Eye, he is Knowledge, he is Dhamma, he is Brahmā. He is the speaker, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the giver of the deathless, the lord of the Dhamma, the Tathāgata. That was the time when you should have cross-questioned him about this matter. However he answered, that was how you should have remembered it.”

“Yes, friend Ānanda: Knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees. He is the Eye, he is Knowledge, he is Dhamma, he is Brahmā. He is the speaker, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the giver of the deathless, the lord of the Dhamma, the Tathāgata. That was the time when we should have cross-questioned him about this matter. However he answered, that was how we should have remembered it. But you are praised by the Teacher and esteemed by your observant companions in the holy life. You are capable of analyzing the unanalyzed detailed meaning of this brief statement. Analyze the meaning, Ven. Ānanda without making it difficult!”

“In that case, my friends, listen & pay close attention. I will speak.”

“As you say, friend,” the monks responded to him.

Ven. Ānanda said this: “Friends, concerning the brief statement the Blessed One made, after which he went into his dwelling without analyzing the detailed meaning—i.e., ‘Monks, I don’t say that one would know, see, or reach the end of the cosmos by traveling. But I also don’t say that there is a putting an end to stress without reaching the end of the cosmos’—I understand the detailed meaning to be this: That by means of which, with regard to the cosmos, one is a perceiver of a cosmos, a conceiver of a cosmos, that, in the discipline of the noble is called ‘the cosmos.’ And by means of what, with regard to the cosmos, is one a perceiver of a cosmos, a conceiver of a cosmos? By means of the eye one is, with regard to the cosmos, a perceiver of a cosmos, a conceiver of a cosmos. By means of the ear… the nose… the tongue… the body… the intellect one is, with regard to the cosmos, a perceiver of a cosmos, a conceiver of a cosmos. That by means of which, with regard to the cosmos, one is a perceiver of a cosmos, a conceiver of a cosmos, that, in the discipline of the noble is called ‘the cosmos.’

“So, concerning the brief statement the Blessed One made, after which he entered his dwelling without analyzing the detailed meaning—i.e., ‘Monks, I don’t say that one would know, see, or reach the end of the cosmos by traveling. But I also don’t say that there is a putting an end to stress without reaching the end of the cosmos’—this is how I understand the detailed meaning. Now, friends, if you wish, having gone to the Blessed One, cross-question him about this matter. However he answers is how you should remember it.”

Then the monks, delighting in & approving of Ven. Ānanda’s words, got up from their seats and went to the Blessed One. On arrival, having bowed down to him, they sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they [told him what had happened after he had gone into his dwelling, and ended by saying,] “Then Ven. Ānanda analyzed the meaning using these words, these statements, these phrases.”

“Ānanda is wise, monks. Ānanda is a person of great discernment. If you had asked me about this matter, I too would have answered in the same way he did. That is its meaning, and that is how you should remember it.”

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/dn-than/dn11-thanissaro]]; [[sn12-21-thanissaro/sn12-thanissaro/sn12.15-thanissaro]]; [[sn12-21-thanissaro/sn12-thanissaro/sn12.44-thanissaro]]; [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.82-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an4/an4.45-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an9/an9.38-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.116-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA234]] | S iv 121 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA234]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.82]], [[SN2:26(=ANII47-49]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.116]]
> ◄  [[sn35.115-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.117-thanissaro]] ►
