---
sutta_code: "SN35.110"
sutta_title:
  - "Upādāniyasutta "
  - "Things That Can Be Clung To"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.110]]
> ◄  [[sn35.109-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.115-thanissaro]] ►

## SN35.110 Clinging

## ## Upādāna Sutta


Near Sāvatthī. There the Blessed One said, “Monks, I will teach you clingable phenomena & clinging. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.”

“As you say, lord,” the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said, “And which, monks, are clingable phenomena? Which is the clinging?

“The eye is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“The ear is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“The nose is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“The tongue is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“The body is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“The intellect is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“These are called clingable phenomena. This is the clinging.”

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn44-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn109-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.48-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.121-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn27-thanissaro/sn27.1-thanissaro]]; [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.191-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.110-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA240]] | S iv 110 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA240]], [[SN35.123]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.110]]
> ◄  [[sn35.109-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.115-thanissaro]] ►
