---
sutta_code: "SN35.109"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṁyojaniyasutta "
  - "Things That Fetter"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.109]]
> ◄  [[sn35.101-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.110-thanissaro]] ►

## SN35.109 Fetters

## ## Saññojana Sutta


Near Sāvatthi. There the Blessed One said, “Monks, I will teaching you the phenomena that are conducive to fettering and the fetter. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.”

“As you say, lord, the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said, “And which are the phenomena conducive to fettering? And which is the fetter?

“The eye, monks, is a phenomenon conducive to fettering. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the fetter there.

“The ear is a phenomenon conducive to fettering. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the fetter there.

“The nose is a phenomenon conducive to fettering. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the fetter there.

“The tongue is a phenomenon conducive to fettering. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the fetter there.

“The body is a phenomenon conducive to fettering. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the fetter there.

“The intellect is a phenomenon conducive to fettering. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the fetter there.

“These are called the phenomena conducive to fettering. This is the fetter.”

See also: [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.120-thanissaro]]; [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.191-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.109-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA239]] | S iv 110 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA239]], [[SN35.122]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.109]]
> ◄  [[sn35.101-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.110-thanissaro]] ►
