---
sutta_code: "SN35.24"
sutta_title:
  - "Pahānasutta "
  - "Abandonment (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.24]]
> ◄  [[sn35.23-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.28-thanissaro]] ►

## SN35.24 For Abandoning

## ## Pahāna Sutta


“Monks, I will teach you the All as a phenomenon to be abandoned. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.”

“As you say, lord,” the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said, “And which All is a phenomenon to be abandoned? The eye is to be abandoned.[1](#sn35.24note01) Forms are to be abandoned. Eye-consciousness is to be abandoned. Eye-contact is to be abandoned. And whatever there is that arises in dependence on eye-contact—experienced as pleasure, pain or neither-pleasure-nor-pain—that too is to be abandoned.

“The ear is to be abandoned. Sounds are to be abandoned…

“The nose is to be abandoned. Aromas are to be abandoned…

“The tongue is to be abandoned. Flavors are to be abandoned…

“The body is to be abandoned. Tactile sensations are to be abandoned…

“The intellect is to be abandoned. Ideas are to be abandoned. Intellect-consciousness is to be abandoned. Intellect-contact is to be abandoned. And whatever there is that arises in dependence on intellect-contact—experienced as pleasure, pain or neither-pleasure-nor-pain—that too is to be abandoned.

“This is called the All as a phenomenon to be abandoned.”

Note

1. To abandon the eye, etc., here means to abandon passion and desire for these things. See [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn27-thanissaro/sn27.1-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.24-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA224]] | S iv 15 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA224]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN35.248]], [[MN1]], [[MA106]], [[AN4.174]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.24]]
> ◄  [[sn35.23-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.28-thanissaro]] ►
