---
sutta_code: "SN35.187"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.187]]
> ◄  [[sn35.153-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.188-thanissaro]] ►

## SN35.187 The Ocean (1)

## ## Samudda Sutta


“‘The ocean, the ocean,’ says the uninstructed run-of-the-mill person. But that’s not the ocean in the discipline of the noble ones. It’s a great mass of water, a great body of water.

“The eye is a person’s ocean, and its current consists of forms. Whoever resists that current consisting of forms is said to have crossed over the ocean of the eye with its waves, whirlpools, sharks, & demons. Crossed over, gone beyond, one stands on high ground, a brahman.

“The ear is a person’s ocean…

“The nose is a person’s ocean…

“The tongue is a person’s ocean…

“The body is a person’s ocean…

“The intellect is a person’s ocean, and its current consists of ideas. Whoever resists that current consisting of ideas is said to have crossed over the ocean of the intellect with its waves, whirlpools, sharks, & demons. Crossed over, gone beyond, one stands on firm ground, a brahman.”

That is what the Blessed One said. When the One Well-gone had said that, he—the Teacher—said further:

Whoever crosses over this ocean,

with its danger of sharks, demons, waves,

so very hard to cross

is called:

an attainer of wisdom

who has lived the holy life,

one who’s attained the end of the cosmos,

one gone beyond.

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn67-thanissaro]]; [[sn12-21-thanissaro/sn15-thanissaro/sn15.3-thanissaro]]; [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.197-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an4/an4.5-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.187-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.187]]
> ◄  [[sn35.153-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.188-thanissaro]] ►
