---
sutta_code: "SN35.136"
sutta_title:
  - "Paṭhamarūpārāmasutta "
  - "Delight in Forms (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.136]]
> ◄  [[sn35.135-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.145-thanissaro]] ►

## SN35.136 Delight in Forms

## ## Rūpārāma Sutta


“Monks, devas & human beings take pleasure in forms, delight in forms, rejoice in forms. With the change, fading away, & cessation of forms, devas & human beings dwell in suffering & stress.

“Devas & human beings take pleasure in sounds… take pleasure in aromas… take pleasure in flavors… take pleasure in tactile sensations…

“Devas & human beings take pleasure in ideas, delight in ideas, rejoice in ideas. With the change, fading away, & cessation of ideas, devas & human beings dwell in suffering & stress.

“But the Tathāgata, monks—worthy & rightly self-awakened—knowing, as they have come to be, the origination, the disappearance, the allure, the drawbacks of—and escape from—forms, doesn’t take pleasure in forms, delight in forms, rejoice in forms. With the change, fading away, & cessation of forms, the Tathāgata dwells happily.

“Knowing, as they have come to be, the origination, the disappearance, the allure, the drawbacks of—and escape from—sounds… aromas… flavors… tactile sensations…

“Knowing, as they have come to be, the origination, the disappearance, the allure, the drawbacks of—and escape from—ideas, he doesn’t take pleasure in ideas, delight in ideas, rejoice in ideas. With the change, fading away, & cessation of ideas, the Tathāgata dwells happily.”[1](#sn35.136note01)

“All sights, sounds, aromas, flavors,

tactile sensations, & ideas

that are       welcome,

appealing,

agreeable—

as long as they’re said

to exist,

are supposed by the world

together with its devas

to be bliss.

But when they cease,

that’s supposed by them

to be stress.

The stopping of self-identity

is viewed by the noble ones

as bliss.

This, when seen,

runs counter

to the whole world.

What others say       is blissful,

the noble ones say       is stress.

What others say       is stressful,

the noble know       as bliss.

See the Dhamma, hard to understand!

Here those who don’t know

are confused.

For those who are veiled,

it’s       darkness,

blindness

for those who don’t see.

But for the good it’s blatant,

like light for those who see.

Though in its very presence,

they don’t understand it—

dumb animals, unadept in the Dhamma.

It’s not easy

for those overcome

by passion for becoming,

flowing along

in the stream of becoming,

falling under Māra’s sway,[2](#sn35.136note02)

to wake up

to this Dhamma.

Who, apart from the noble,

is worthy to wake up

to this state?—

the state that,

through rightly knowing it,

they totally unbind,

effluent-free.”

Notes

1. The poem that follows is identical to the final poem in [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/snp-thanissaro-notes-fixed-topfolders/snp3/snp3.12-thanissaro]].

2. On Māra’s sway, see [[sn4.19-thanissaro]], [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.115-thanissaro]], [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.189-thanissaro]], and [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.199-thanissaro]].

See also: [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.1-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.94-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.136-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA308]] | S iv 138 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA308]], [[SNP3.12]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.136]]
> ◄  [[sn35.135-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn35.145-thanissaro]] ►
