---
sutta_code: "AN10.103"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.103]]
> ◄  [[an10.101-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an10.108-thanissaro]] ►

## AN10.103 Wrongness

## ## Micchatta Sutta


“From wrongness comes failure, not success. And how is it, monks, that from wrongness comes failure, not success?

“In a person of wrong view, wrong resolve comes into being. In a person of wrong resolve, wrong speech. In a person of wrong speech, wrong action. In a person of wrong action, wrong livelihood. In a person of wrong livelihood, wrong effort. In a person of wrong effort, wrong mindfulness. In a person of wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration. In a person of wrong concentration, wrong knowledge. In a person of wrong knowledge, wrong release.

“This is how from wrongness comes failure, not success.

“From rightness comes success, not failure. And how is it, monks, that from rightness comes success, not failure?

“In a person of right view, right resolve comes into being. In a person of right resolve, right speech. In a person of right speech, right action. In a person of right action, right livelihood. In a person of right livelihood, right effort. In a person of right effort, right mindfulness. In a person of right mindfulness, right concentration. In a person of right concentration, right knowledge. In a person of right knowledge, right release.[1](#^[[an10-thanissaro]].103note01) ^[[an10-thanissaro]].103note01-ref

“This is how from rightness comes success, not failure.”

Note

1. [[mn117-thanissaro]] states that the path of stream-entry has eight factors, whereas the path to arahantship has these ten.

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.103-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA786]] | A v 211 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA786]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.103]]
> ◄  [[an10.101-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an10.108-thanissaro]] ►
