---
sutta_code: "AN10.61"
sutta_title:
  - "Avijjā "
  - "Ignorance"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.61]]
> ◄  [[an10.60-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an10.69-thanissaro]] ►

## AN10.61 Ignorance

## ## Avijjā Sutta


“‘Monks, a beginning point for ignorance—[such that one might say], “Before this, ignorance did not exist; then it came into play”—cannot be discerned.’ This, monks, has been said. Nevertheless, it can be discerned, ‘Ignorance comes from this condition.’ And I tell you, ignorance has its food and is not without food. And what is the food for ignorance? ‘The five hindrances,’ it should be said. And I tell you, the five hindrances have their food and are not without food. And what is the food for the five hindrances? ‘The three forms of misconduct’ … And what is the food for the three forms of misconduct? ‘Lack of restraint of the senses’ … And what is the food for lack of restraint of the senses? ‘Lack of mindfulness & alertness’ … And what is the food for lack of mindfulness & alertness? ‘Inappropriate attention’ … And what is the food for inappropriate attention? ‘Lack of conviction’ … And what is the food for lack of conviction? ‘Not hearing the true Dhamma’ … And what is the food for not hearing the true Dhamma? ‘Associating with people of no integrity’ [or: ‘not associating with people of integrity’], it should be said.

“Thus, when not associating with people of integrity is made full, it fills [the conditions for] not hearing the true Dhamma. When not hearing the true Dhamma is made full, it fills [the conditions for] lack of conviction. When lack of conviction is made full, it fills [the conditions for] inappropriate attention… lack of mindfulness & alertness… lack of restraint of the senses… the three forms of misconduct… the five hindrances. When the five hindrances are made full, they fulfill [the conditions for] ignorance. Such is the food of this ignorance, and thus is it made full.

“Just as when the devas pour rain in heavy drops & crash thunder on the upper mountains: The water, flowing down along the slopes, fills the branches of the mountain ravines & gullies. When the branches of the mountain ravines & gullies are full, they fill the little lakes. When the little lakes are full, they fill the big lakes… the little rivers… the big rivers. When the big rivers are full, they fill the great ocean. Such is the food of the great ocean, and thus is it made full. In the same way, when not associating with people of integrity is made full, it fills [the conditions for] not hearing the true Dhamma… lack of conviction… inappropriate attention… lack of mindfulness & alertness… lack of restraint of the senses… the three forms of misconduct… the five hindrances. When the five hindrances are made full, they fulfill [the conditions for] ignorance. Such is the food of this ignorance, and thus is it made full.

“Now, I tell you, clear knowing & release have their food and are not without food. And what is their food? ‘The seven factors for awakening,’ it should be said. And I tell you, the seven factors for awakening have their food and are not without food. And what is the food for the seven factors for awakening? ‘The four establishings of mindfulness’ … And what is the food for the four establishings of mindfulness? ‘The three forms of right conduct’ … And what is the food for the three forms of right conduct? ‘Restraint of the senses’ … And what is the food for restraint of the senses? ‘Mindfulness & alertness’ … And what is the food for mindfulness & alertness? ‘Appropriate attention’ … And what is the food for appropriate attention? ‘Conviction’ … And what is the food for conviction? ‘Hearing the true Dhamma’ … And what is the food for hearing the true Dhamma? ‘Associating with people of integrity,’ it should be said.

“Thus, when associating with people of integrity is made full, it fills [the conditions for] hearing the true Dhamma… conviction… appropriate attention… mindfulness & alertness… restraint of the senses… the three forms of right conduct… the four establishings of mindfulness… the seven factors for awakening. When the seven factors for awakening are made full, they fill [the conditions for] clear knowing & release. Such is the food for this clear knowing & release, and thus are they made full.

“Just as when the devas pour rain in heavy drops & crash thunder on the upper mountains: The water, flowing down along the slopes, fills the branches of the mountain ravines & gullies… the little lakes… the big lakes… the little rivers… the big rivers. When the big rivers are made full, they fill the great ocean. Such is the food of the great ocean, and thus is it made full. In the same way, when associating with people of integrity is made full, it fills [the conditions for] hearing the true Dhamma… conviction… appropriate attention… mindfulness & alertness… restraint of the senses… the three forms of right conduct… the four establishings of mindfulness… the seven factors for awakening. When the seven factors for awakening are made full, they fill [the conditions for] clear knowing & release. Such is the food for this clear knowing & release, and thus are they made full.”

See also: [[mn118-thanissaro]]; [[sn12-21-thanissaro/sn12-thanissaro/sn12.23-thanissaro]]; [[sn12-21-thanissaro/sn15-thanissaro/sn15.3-thanissaro]], [[sn12-21-thanissaro/sn15-thanissaro/sn15.9-thanissaro]]; [[sn12-21-thanissaro/sn15-thanissaro/sn15.11-thanissaro]]; [[sn45.1-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.61-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA51]], [[MA52]], [[MA53]] | A v 113 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.62]], [[MA51]], [[MA52]], [[MA53]], [[AN3.95]], [[AN10.61]], [[AN4.147]], [[SN55.38]], [[SN12.23]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.61]]
> ◄  [[an10.60-thanissaro]] 📜  [[an10.69-thanissaro]] ►
