---
sutta_code: "SN11.22"
sutta_title:
  - "Ugly "
  - "SN11:22"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.22]]
> ◄  [[sn11.15-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn11.24-thanissaro]] ►

## SN11.22 Ugly

## ## Dubbaṇṇiya Sutta


Near Sāvatthī. “Once, monks, a certain yakkha—ugly & misshapen—sat down on Sakka the deva-king’s seat. Then the devas of the Thirty-three were indignant, annoyed, & complained: ‘Isn’t it amazing, good sirs! Isn’t it astounding! This yakkha—ugly & misshapen—has sat down on Sakka’s seat!’ But the more the devas of the Thirty-three were indignant, annoyed, & complained, the more well-formed that yakkha became, the more good-looking & inspiring.

“Then the devas of the Thirty-three went to Sakka the deva-king and, on arrival, said to him, ‘Just now, dear sir, a certain yakkha—ugly & misshapen—sat down on your seat. The devas of the Thirty-three were indignant, annoyed, & complained: “Isn’t it amazing, good sirs! Isn’t it astounding! This yakkha—ugly & misshapen—has sat down on Sakka’s seat!” But the more the devas of the Thirty-three were indignant, annoyed, & complained, the more well-formed that yakkha became, the more good-looking & inspiring.’

“‘Then, dear sirs, he must be an anger-eating yakkha.’

“So Sakka the deva-king approached the anger-eating yakkha and, on arrival, arranging his upper robe over one shoulder & kneeling with one knee on the ground, raised his hands palm-to-palm over his heart toward the anger-eating yakkha and announced his name three times, ‘I, dear sir, am Sakka the deva-king! I, dear sir, am Sakka the deva-king! I, dear sir, am Sakka the deva-king!’[1](#sn11.22note01) The more Sakka the deva-king announced his name, the uglier & more misshapen the yakkha became. Then, having become uglier & more misshapen, he disappeared right there.

“Then Sakka the deva-king, sitting down on his seat & conciliating the devas of the Thirthy-three, on that occasion recited these verses:

“‘I’m not easily upset in mind,

nor easily led into a whirl.

I don’t get angry for long.

Anger doesn’t persist in me.

When angry, I don’t speak harshly

or insist on my virtues.

I keep myself well under control

with an eye to my own good.’”

Note

1. Repeating one’s name in this fashion was, at that time, considered a sign of respect. See [DN 16, note 46](../DN/DN16.html#dn16note46).

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn21-thanissaro]]; [[sn1-11-thanissaro/sn1-thanissaro/sn1.71-thanissaro]]; [[sn3.23-thanissaro]]; [[sn7.2-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an3/an3.35-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an3/an3.133-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an4/an4.200-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an5/an5.161-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an7/an7.60-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an10/an10.80-thanissaro]]; [Dhp XVII](../KN/Dhp/Ch17.html)

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn11.22-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA45.5]], [[SA-2.36]], [[SA1107]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA45.5]], [[SA-2.36]], [[SA1107]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.22]]
> ◄  [[sn11.15-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn11.24-thanissaro]] ►
