---
sutta_code: "SN11.24"
sutta_title:
  - "Transgression "
  - "SN11:24"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.24]]
> ◄  [[sn11.22-thanissaro]] 📜  [[]] ►

## SN11.24 A Transgression

## ## Accaya Sutta


On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery. And on that occasion two monks were quarreling, and one of them committed a transgression. So, in the presence of the other, he confessed his transgression as a transgression, but the other didn’t pardon him.

So a large number of monks went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One, “Just now, lord, two monks were quarreling, and one of them committed a transgression. So, in the presence of the other, he confessed his transgression as a transgression, but the other didn’t pardon him.

“Monks, there are these two fools. Which two? The one who doesn’t see his transgression as a transgression, and the one who doesn’t rightfully pardon another who has confessed his transgression. These two are fools.

“There are these two wise people. Which two? The one who sees his transgression as a transgression, and the one who rightfully pardons another who has confessed his transgression. These two are wise people.

“Once, monks, Sakka the deva-king, having conciliated the devas of the Thirty-three in the Sudhamma assembly hall, on that occasion recited this verse:

“‘Bring your anger under control.

Don’t       let friendships decay.

Don’t       blame the blameless.

Don’t       speak divisively,

for anger, like a mountain avalanche,

crushes evil people.’”

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn21-thanissaro]]; [[sn1-11-thanissaro/sn1-thanissaro/sn1.71-thanissaro]]; [[sn3.23-thanissaro]]; [[sn7.2-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an3/an3.35-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an3/an3.133-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an4/an4.200-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an5/an5.161-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an7/an7.60-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an10/an10.80-thanissaro]]; [Dhp XVII](../KN/Dhp/Ch17.html)

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn11.24-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.37]], [[SA1108]] |  |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.37]], [[SA1108]], [[SN11.25]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN11]]  / 🌐 [[SN11.24]]
> ◄  [[sn11.22-thanissaro]] 📜  [[]] ►
