---
sutta_code: "SN22.76"
sutta_title:
  - "Arahantasutta "
  - "Arahants (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.76]]
> ◄  [[sn22.75-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn22.77-bodhi]] ►

# SN22.76 Arahants (1)

At Sāvatthī. “Bhikkhus, form is impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering. What is suffering is nonself. What is nonself \[83\] should be seen as it really is with correct wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ “Feeling is impermanent…. Perception is impermanent…. Volitional formations are impermanent…. Consciousness is impermanent. What is impermanent is suffering. What is suffering is nonself. What is nonself should be seen as it really is with correct wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’

“Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple experiences revulsion towards form, revulsion towards feeling, revulsion towards perception, revulsion towards volitional formations, revulsion towards consciousness. Experiencing revulsion, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion \[his mind\] is liberated. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It’s liberated.’ He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’

“To whatever extent, bhikkhus, there are abodes of beings, even up to the pinnacle of existence, these are the foremost in the world, these are the best, that is, the arahants.”

This is what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this:

> “Happy indeed are the arahants!  
> No craving can be found in them.  
> Cut off is the conceit ‘I am,’  
> Burst asunder is delusion’s net.
> 
> >   
> 
> “They have reached the unstirred state,  
> Limpid are their minds;  
> They are unsullied in the world—  
> The holy ones, without taints.
> 
>   
> 
> “Having fully understood the five aggregates,  
> Ranging in the seven good qualities,  
> Those praiseworthy superior men  
> Are the Buddha’s bosom sons.
> 
>   
> 
> “Endowed with the seven gems,  
> Trained in the threefold training,  
> Those great heroes wander about  
> With fear and trembling abandoned.
> 
>   
> 
> “Endowed with the ten factors,  
> Those great nāgas, collected,  
> Are the best beings in the world:  
> No craving can be found in them.
> 
>   
> 
> “The adepts’ knowledge has arisen in them:  
> ‘This body is the last I bear.’  
> In regard to the core of the holy life  
> They no longer depend on others. \[84\]
> 
>   
> 
> “They do not waver in discrimination,  
> They are released from renewed existence.  
> Having reached the stage of the tamed,  
> They are the victors in the world.
> 
>   
> 
> “Above, across, and below,  
> Delight is no more found in them.  
> They boldly sound their lion’s roar:  
> ‘The enlightened are supreme in the world.’”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.76-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[MA120]] | S iii 82 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[MA120]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.76]]
> ◄  [[sn22.75-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn22.77-bodhi]] ►
