---
sutta_code: "SN22.103"
sutta_title:
  - "Antasutta "
  - "Portions"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.103]]
> ◄  [[sn22.102-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn22.104-bodhi]] ►

# SN22.103 Portions

At Sāvatthī. “Bhikkhus, there are these four portions. What four? \[158\] The portion of identity, the portion of the origin of identity, the portion of the cessation of identity, the portion of the way leading to the cessation of identity.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the portion of identity? It should be said: the five aggregates subject to clinging. What five? The form aggregate subject to clinging, the feeling aggregate subject to clinging, the perception aggregate subject to clinging, the volitional formations aggregate subject to clinging, the consciousness aggregate subject to clinging. This is called the portion of identity.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the portion of the origin of identity? It is this craving that leads to renewed existence, accompanied by delight and lust, seeking delight here and there; that is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, craving for extermination. This is called the portion of the origin of identity.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the portion of the cessation of identity? It is the remainderless fading away and cessation of that same craving, the giving up and relinquishing of it, freedom from it, non-reliance on it. This is called the portion of the cessation of identity.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the portion of the way leading to the cessation of identity? It is this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view … right samādhi. This is called the portion of the way leading to the cessation of identity.

“These, bhikkhus, are the four portions.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.103-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA70]] | S iii 157 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA70]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.103]]
> ◄  [[sn22.102-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn22.104-bodhi]] ►
