---
sutta_code: "AN10.12"
sutta_title:
  - "Pañcaṅga "
  - "Five Factors"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.12]]
> ◄  [[an10.11-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.13-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.12 Five Factors

> **Division:** II. PROTECTOR

“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who has abandoned five factors and possesses five factors is called, in this Dhamma and discipline, a supreme person who is consummate and has completely lived the spiritual life.

“And how has a bhikkhu abandoned five factors? Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. It is in this way that a bhikkhu has abandoned five factors.

“And how does a bhikkhu possess five factors? Here, a bhikkhu possesses the aggregate of virtuous behavior of one beyond training, the aggregate of samādhi of one beyond training, the aggregate of wisdom of one beyond training, the aggregate of liberation of one beyond training, and the aggregate of the knowledge and vision of liberation of one beyond training. It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses five factors.

“When a bhikkhu has abandoned these five factors and possesses these five factors, he is called, in this Dhamma and discipline, a supreme person who is consummate and complete in living the spiritual life.”

When sensual desire and ill will,

dullness and drowsiness,

restlessness, and doubt are

totally absent in a bhikkhu; \[17\]

when one like this possesses

the virtue and samādhi

of one beyond training,

and \[similar\] liberation and knowledge;

possessing five factors

and having removed five factors,

he is truly called a consummate one

in this Dhamma and discipline.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.12-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 16 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[THAG1]].74, [[THAG17]].2 |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.12]]
> ◄  [[an10.11-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.13-bodhi]] ►
