---
sutta_code: "AN10.113"
sutta_title:
  - "Adhamma "
  - "Bad Principles"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.113]]
> ◄  [[an10.112-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.114-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.113 Non-Dhamma (1)

> **Division:** II. PACCOROHANṆĪ

“Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and harmful should be understood, and what is the Dhamma and beneficial should also be understood. Having understood what is non-Dhamma and harmful, and also what is the Dhamma and beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial.

“And what, bhikkhus, is non-Dhamma and harmful? Wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong samādhi, wrong knowledge, and wrong liberation. \[223\] This is what is said to be non-Dhamma and harmful.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma and beneficial? Right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right samādhi, right knowledge, and right liberation. This is what is said to be the Dhamma and beneficial.

“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and harmful should be understood, and what is the Dhamma and beneficial should also be understood. Having understood what is non-Dhamma and harmful, and also what is the Dhamma and beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.113-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 222 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.171]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.113]]
> ◄  [[an10.112-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.114-bodhi]] ►
