---
sutta_code: "AN10.102"
sutta_title:
  - "Bojjhaṅga "
  - "Awakening Factors"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.102]]
> ◄  [[an10.101-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.103-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.102 Factors of Enlightenment

> **Division:** I. AN ASCETIC’S PERCEPTIONS

“Bhikkhus, when these seven factors of enlightenment are developed and cultivated, they fulfill the three true knowledges. What seven?

(1) “The enlightenment factor of mindfulness, (2) the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, (3) the enlightenment factor of energy, (4) the enlightenment factor of rapture, (5) the enlightenment factor of tranquility, (6) the enlightenment factor of samādhi, and (7) the enlightenment factor of equanimity. When these seven factors of enlightenment are developed and cultivated, they fulfill the three true knowledges. What three?

(8) “Here, a bhikkhu recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births … Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.

(9) “With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human … he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.

(10) “With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.

“When, bhikkhus, these seven factors of enlightenment are developed and cultivated, they fulfill these three true knowledges.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.102-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 211 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.102]]
> ◄  [[an10.101-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.103-bodhi]] ►
