---
sutta_code: "AN10.103"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.103]]
> ◄  [[an10.102-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.104-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.103 The Wrong Course

> **Division:** I. AN ASCETIC’S PERCEPTIONS

“Bhikkhus, in dependence on the wrong course there is failure, not success. And how is it that in dependence on the wrong course there is failure, not success?

(1) “For one of wrong view, (2) wrong intention originates. For one of wrong intention, (3) wrong speech originates. For one of wrong speech, \[212\] (4) wrong action originates. For one of wrong action, (5) wrong livelihood originates. For one of wrong livelihood, (6) wrong effort originates. For one of wrong effort, (7) wrong mindfulness originates. For one of wrong mindfulness, (8) wrong samādhi originates. For one of wrong samādhi, (9) wrong knowledge originates. For one of wrong knowledge, (10) wrong liberation originates. In this way, in dependence on the wrong course, there is failure, not success.

“In dependence on the right course, there is success, not failure. And how is it that in dependence on the right course, there is success, not failure?

(1) “For one of right view, (2) right intention originates. For one of right intention, (3) right speech originates. For one of right speech, (4) right action originates. For one of right action, (5) right livelihood originates. For one of right livelihood, (6) right effort originates. For one of right effort, (7) right mindfulness originates. For one of right mindfulness, (8) right samādhi originates. For one of right samādhi, (9) right knowledge originates. For one of right knowledge, (10) right liberation originates. In this way, in dependence on the right course, there is success, not failure.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.103-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA786]] | A v 211 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA786]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.103]]
> ◄  [[an10.102-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.104-bodhi]] ►
