---
sutta_code: "AN10.105"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.105]]
> ◄  [[an10.104-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.106-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.105 True Knowledge

> **Division:** I. AN ASCETIC’S PERCEPTIONS

“Bhikkhus, ignorance—accompanied by moral shamelessness and moral recklessness—is the forerunner in entering upon unwholesome qualities. (1) For a foolish person immersed in ignorance, wrong view originates. (2) For one of wrong view, wrong intention originates. (3) For one of wrong intention, wrong speech originates. (4) For one of wrong speech, wrong action originates. (5) For one of wrong action, wrong livelihood originates. (6) For one of wrong livelihood, wrong effort originates. (7) For one of wrong effort, wrong mindfulness originates. (8) For one of wrong mindfulness, wrong samādhi originates. (9) For one of wrong samādhi, wrong knowledge originates. (10) For one of wrong knowledge, wrong liberation originates.

“Bhikkhus, true knowledge—accompanied by a sense of moral shame and moral dread—is the forerunner in entering upon wholesome qualities. (1) For a wise person who has arrived at true knowledge, right view originates. (2) For one of right view, right intention originates. (3) For one of right intention, right speech originates. (4) For one of right speech, right action originates. (5) For one of right action, right livelihood originates. (6) For one of right livelihood, right effort originates. (7) For one of right effort, right mindfulness originates. (8) For one of right mindfulness, right samādhi originates. (9) For one of right samādhi, right knowledge originates. (10) For one of right knowledge, right liberation originates.” \[215\]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.105-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 214 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.105]]
> ◄  [[an10.104-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.106-bodhi]] ►
