---
sutta_code: "AN10.108"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.108]]
> ◄  [[an10.107-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.109-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.108 Physicians

> **Division:** I. AN ASCETIC’S PERCEPTIONS

“Bhikkhus, physicians prescribe a purgative for eliminating ailments originating from bile, phlegm, and wind. There is this purgative, bhikkhus; that I do not deny. Yet this purgative sometimes succeeds and sometimes fails.

“But I will teach, bhikkhus, a noble purgative that always succeeds and never fails. In dependence on this purgative, beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish. Listen and attend closely. I will speak.”

“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

“And what, bhikkhus, is that noble purgative that always succeeds and never fails?

(1) “For one of right view, wrong view is purged, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong view as condition are also purged, and with right view as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.

(2)–(9) “For one of right intention, wrong intention is purged … For one of right speech, wrong speech is purged … For one of right action, wrong action is purged … For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is purged … For one of right effort, wrong effort is purged … For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is purged … \[219\] For one of right samādhi, wrong samādhi is purged … For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is purged …

(10) “For one of right liberation, wrong liberation is purged, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong liberation as condition are also purged, and with right liberation as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.

“This, bhikkhus, is that noble purgative that always succeeds and never fails, and in dependence on which beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.108-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[EA21.7]] | A v 218 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[EA21.7]], [[AN3.68]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.108]]
> ◄  [[an10.107-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.109-bodhi]] ►
