---
sutta_code: "AN10.117"
sutta_title:
  - "Saṅgārava "
  - "With Saṅgārava"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.117]]
> ◄  [[an10.116-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.118-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.117 Saṅgārava

> **Division:** II. PACCOROHANṆĪ

Then the brahmin Saṅgārava approached the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him. When they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to the Blessed One:

“Master Gotama, what is the near shore? What is the far shore?”

“Brahmin, (1) wrong view is the near shore, right view the far shore. (2) Wrong intention is the near shore, right intention the far shore. (3) Wrong speech is the near shore, right speech the far shore. (4) Wrong action is the near shore, right action the far shore. (5) Wrong livelihood is the near shore, right livelihood the far shore. (6) Wrong effort is the near shore, right effort the far shore. (7) Wrong mindfulness is the near shore, right mindfulness the far shore. (8) Wrong samādhi is the near shore, right samādhi the far shore. (9) Wrong knowledge is the near shore, right knowledge the far shore. (10) Wrong liberation is the near shore, right liberation the far shore. The one, brahmin, is the near shore, the other the far shore.”

Few are those people

who go beyond.



The rest merely run

along the \[near\] shore.

When the Dhamma is rightly expounded

those people who practice accordingly

are the ones who will go beyond

the realm of Death so hard to cross.

Having left the dark qualities behind,

a wise person should develop the bright ones.

Having come from home into homelessness,

where it is hard to take delight—

There in seclusion one should seek delight,

having left behind sensual pleasures.

Owning nothing, the wise person

should cleanse himself of mental defilements. \[233\]

Those whose minds are rightly well developed

in the enlightenment factors,

who through non-clinging find delight

in the relinquishment of grasping:

luminous, with taints destroyed,

they are the quenched ones in the world.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.117-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA771]] | A v 232 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA771]], [[SN45.34]], [[DHP\|DHP85]], [[AN10.118]], [[AN10.169]], [[AN10.170]], [[SN46.17]], [[DHP\|DHP86]], [[DHP\|DHP87]], [[DHP\|DHP88]], [[DHP\|DHP89]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.117]]
> ◄  [[an10.116-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.118-bodhi]] ►
