---
sutta_code: "AN10.119"
sutta_title:
  - "Paccorohaṇī "
  - "Ceremony Of Descent"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.119]]
> ◄  [[an10.118-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.120-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.119 Paccorohaṇī (1)

> **Division:** II. PACCOROHANṆĪ

Now on that occasion, on the uposatha day, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇī stood to one side not far from the Blessed One, with his head washed, wearing a new pair of linen clothes, holding a handful of wet \[234\] _kusa_ grass. The Blessed One saw him standing there and said to him:

“Why is it, brahmin, that on the uposatha day you stand to one side with your head washed, wearing a new pair of linen clothes, holding a handful of wet _kusa_ grass? What is happening today with the brahmin clan?”

“Today, Master Gotama, is the brahmin clan’s _paccorohaṇī_ festival.”

“But how do the brahmins observe the _paccorohaṇī_ festival?”

“Here, Master Gotama, on the uposatha day, the brahmins wash their heads and put on a pair of new linen clothes. They then smear the ground with wet cow dung, cover this with green _kusa_ grass, and lie down between the boundary and the fire house. In the course of the night, they get up three times, and with reverential salutation pay homage to the fire: ‘We descend in honor of the revered one. We descend in honor of the revered one.’ They offer abundant ghee, oil, and butter to the fire. When the night has passed, they offer excellent food of various kinds to brahmins. It is in this way, Master Gotama, that the brahmins observe the _paccorohaṇī_ festival.”

“The _paccorohaṇī_ festival in the Noble One’s discipline, brahmin, is quite different from the _paccorohaṇī_ festival of the brahmins.”

“But how, Master Gotama, is the _paccorohaṇī_ festival observed in the Noble One’s discipline? It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me the Dhamma by explaining how the _paccorohaṇī_ festival is observed in the Noble One’s discipline.”

“Well then, brahmin, listen and attend closely. I will speak.”

“Yes, sir,” the brahmin Jāṇussoṇī replied. The Blessed One said this: \[235\]

(1) “Here, brahmin, the noble disciple reflects thus: ‘The result of wrong view is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong view; he descends from wrong view.

(2) “ … ‘The result of wrong intention is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong intention; he descends from wrong intention.

(3) “… ‘The result of wrong speech is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong speech; he descends from wrong speech.

(4) “… ‘The result of wrong action is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong action; he descends from wrong action.

(5) “… ‘The result of wrong livelihood is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong livelihood; he descends from wrong livelihood.

(6) “… ‘The result of wrong effort is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong effort; he descends from wrong effort.

(7) “… ‘The result of wrong mindfulness is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong mindfulness; he descends from wrong mindfulness.

(8) “… ‘The result of wrong samādhi is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong samādhi; he descends from wrong samādhi.

(9) “… ‘The result of wrong knowledge is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong knowledge; he descends from wrong knowledge.

(10) “… ‘The result of wrong liberation is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’ Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong liberation; he descends from wrong liberation.

“It is in this way, brahmin, that the _paccorohaṇī_ festival is observed in the Noble One’s discipline.”

“The _paccorohaṇī_ festival in the Noble One’s discipline, Master Gotama, is quite different from the _paccorohaṇī_ festival of the brahmins. And the _paccorohaṇī_ festival of the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of the _paccorohaṇī_ festival in the Noble One’s discipline. \[236\]

“Excellent, Master Gotama! Excellent, Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms. I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus. Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.119-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA1040]] | A v 233 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.167]], [[SA1040]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.119]]
> ◄  [[an10.118-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.120-bodhi]] ►
