---
sutta_code: "AN10.109"
sutta_title:
  - "Micchatta "
  - "Wrong Way"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.109]]
> ◄  [[an10.108-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.110-bodhi]] ►

# AN10.109 Emetic

> **Division:** I. AN ASCETIC’S PERCEPTIONS

“Bhikkhus, physicians prescribe an emetic for eliminating ailments originating from bile, phlegm, and wind. There is this emetic, bhikkhus; that I do not deny. Yet this emetic sometimes succeeds and sometimes fails.

“But I will teach, bhikkhus, a noble emetic that always succeeds and never fails. In dependence on this emetic, beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish. Listen and attend closely. I will speak.”

“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

“And what, bhikkhus, is that noble emetic that always succeeds and never fails? \[220\]

(1) “For one of right view, wrong view is vomited up, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong view as condition are also vomited up, and with right view as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.

(2)–(9) “For one of right intention, wrong intention is vomited up … For one of right speech, wrong speech is vomited up … For one of right action, wrong action is vomited up … For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is vomited up … For one of right effort, wrong effort is vomited up … For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is vomited up … For one of right samādhi, wrong samādhi is vomited up … For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is vomited up …

(10) “For one of right liberation, wrong liberation is vomited up, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong liberation as condition are also vomited up, and with right liberation as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.

“This, bhikkhus, is that noble emetic that always succeeds and never fails, and in dependence on which beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:an10.109-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | A v 219 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[AN]] / 📂 [[AN10]]  / 🌐 [[AN10.109]]
> ◄  [[an10.108-bodhi]] 📜  [[an10.110-bodhi]] ►
