---
sutta_code: "SN34.2"
sutta_title:
  - "Samādhimūlakaṭhitisutta "
  - "Maintenance in relation to Concentration"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.2]]
> ◄  [[sn34.1-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn34.3-bodhi]] ►

# SN34.2 Maintenance in relation to samādhi

At Sāvatthī. “Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of meditators. What four?

“Here, bhikkhus, a meditator is skilled in samādhi regarding samādhi but not skilled in maintenance regarding samādhi.

“Here a meditator is skilled in maintenance regarding samādhi but not skilled in samādhi regarding samādhi.

“Here a meditator is skilled neither in samādhi nor in maintenance regarding samādhi.

“Here a meditator is skilled both in samādhi and in maintenance regarding samādhi.

“Therein, bhikkhus, the meditator who is skilled both in samādhi and in maintenance regarding samādhi \[265\] is the chief, the best, the foremost, the supreme, the most excellent of these four kinds of meditators.

“Just as, bhikkhus, from a cow comes milk … and from ghee comes cream-of-ghee, which is reckoned the best of all these, so too the meditator who is skilled both in samādhi and in maintenance regarding samādhi … is the most excellent of these four kinds of meditators.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn34.2-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA883]] | S iii 264 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA883]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.2]]
> ◄  [[sn34.1-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn34.3-bodhi]] ►
