---
sutta_code: "SN34.1"
sutta_title:
  - "Samādhimūlakasamāpattisutta "
  - "Attainment in relation to Concentration"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn34.2-bodhi]] ►

# SN34.1 Attainment in relation to samādhi

At Sāvatthī. “Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of meditators. What four? \[264\]

“Here, bhikkhus, a meditator is skilled in samādhi regarding samādhi but not skilled in attainment regarding samādhi.

“Here a meditator is skilled in attainment regarding samādhi but not skilled in samādhi regarding samādhi.

“Here a meditator is skilled neither in samādhi regarding samādhi nor in attainment regarding samādhi.

“Here a meditator is skilled both in samādhi regarding samādhi and in attainment regarding samādhi.

“Therein, bhikkhus, the meditator who is skilled both in samādhi regarding samādhi and in attainment regarding samādhi is the chief, the best, the foremost, the highest, the most excellent of these four kinds of meditators.

“Just as, bhikkhus, from a cow comes milk, from milk comes cream, from cream comes butter, from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream-of-ghee, which is reckoned the best of all these, so too the meditator who is skilled both in samādhi regarding samādhi and in attainment regarding samādhi is the chief, the best, the foremost, the highest, the most excellent of these four kinds of meditators.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn34.1-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA883]] | S iii 263 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA883]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn34.2-bodhi]] ►
