---
sutta_code: "SN34.11"
sutta_title:
  - "Samāpattimūlakaṭhitisutta "
  - "Maintenance in relation to Attainment"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.11]]
> ◄  [[sn34.10-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn34.12-bodhi]] ►

# SN34.11 Maintenance in relation to Attainment

At Sāvatthī. “Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of meditators. What four?

“Here, bhikkhus, a meditator is skilled in attainment regarding samādhi but not skilled in maintenance regarding samādhi.

“Here a meditator is skilled in maintenance regarding samādhi but not skilled in attainment regarding samādhi.

“Here a meditator is skilled neither in attainment nor in maintenance regarding samādhi.

“Here a meditator is skilled both in attainment and in maintenance regarding samādhi.

“Therein, bhikkhus, the meditator who is skilled both in attainment and in maintenance regarding samādhi is the chief, the best, the foremost, the highest, the most excellent of these four kinds of meditators.

“Just as, bhikkhus, from a cow comes milk … and from ghee comes cream-of-ghee, which is reckoned the best of all these, so too the meditator who is skilled both in attainment and in maintenance regarding samādhi … is the most excellent of these four kinds of meditators.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn34.11-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA883]] | S iii 269 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA883]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN34]]  / 🌐 [[SN34.11]]
> ◄  [[sn34.10-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn34.12-bodhi]] ►
