---
sutta_code: "SN55.23"
sutta_title:
  - "Godhasakkasutta "
  - "Godha"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.23]]
> ◄  [[sn55.22-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn55.24-bodhi]] ►

# SN55.23 Godhā

At Kapilavatthu. Then Mahānāma the Sakyan approached Godhā the Sakyan and said to him: \[372\] “How many things, Godhā, must an individual possess for you to recognize him as a stream-enterer, one no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination?”

“When an individual possesses three things, Mahānāma, I recognize him as a stream-enterer, one no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination. What three? Here, Mahānāma, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha … in the Dhamma … in the Saṅgha…. When an individual possesses these three things, I recognize him as a stream-enterer … with enlightenment as his destination. But, Mahānāma, how many things must an individual possess for you to recognize him as a stream-enterer … with enlightenment as his destination?”

“When an individual possesses four things, Godhā, I recognize him as a stream-enterer … with enlightenment as his destination. What four? Here, Godhā, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha … in the Dhamma … in the Saṅgha.… He possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones, unbroken … leading to samādhi. When an individual possesses these four things, I recognize him as a stream-enterer … with enlightenment as his destination.”

“Wait, Mahānāma! Wait, Mahānāma! The Blessed One alone would know whether or not he possesses these things.”

“Come, Godhā, we should approach the Blessed One. Having approached, we will report this matter to him.” \[373\]

Then Mahānāma the Sakyan and Godhā the Sakyan approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. Mahānāma the Sakyan then reported their conversation, \[continuing thus\]: \[374\]

“Here, venerable sir, some issue concerning the Dhamma may arise. The Blessed One might take one side and the Bhikkhu Saṅgha might take the other side. Whatever side the Blessed One would take, I would take that same side. Let the Blessed One remember me as one who has such confidence.

“Here, venerable sir, some issue concerning the Dhamma may arise. The Blessed One might take one side, and the Bhikkhu Saṅgha and the Bhikkhunī Saṅgha might take the other side.… The Blessed One might take one side, and the Bhikkhu Saṅgha, the Bhikkhunī Saṅgha, and the male lay followers might take the other side.… The Blessed One might take one side, and the Bhikkhu Saṅgha, the Bhikkhunī Saṅgha, the male lay followers, and the female lay followers might take the other side. Whatever side the Blessed One would take, I would take that same side. Let the Blessed One remember me as one who has such confidence.

“Here, venerable sir, some issue concerning the Dhamma may arise. The Blessed One might take one side, and the Bhikkhu Saṅgha, the Bhikkhunī Saṅgha, the male lay followers, the female lay followers, and the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this generation with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, might take the other side. Whatever side the Blessed One would take, I would take that same side. Let the Blessed One remember me as one who has such confidence.”

\[The Blessed One said:\] “When he speaks like that, Godhā, what would you say about Mahānāma the Sakyan?”

“When he speaks in such a way, venerable sir, I would not say anything about Mahānāma the Sakyan except what is good and favourable.” \[375\]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA-2.159]], [[SA935]] | S v 371 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA-2.159]], [[SA935]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[AN6.16]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.23]]
> ◄  [[sn55.22-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn55.24-bodhi]] ►
