---
sutta_code: "SN55.30"
sutta_title:
  - "Nandakalicchavisutta "
  - "The Licchavi"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.30]]
> ◄  [[sn55.29-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn55.31-bodhi]] ►

# SN55.30 The Licchavi

On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof. Then Nandaka, the minister of the Licchavis, approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. The Blessed One then said to him:

“Nandaka, a noble disciple who possesses four things is a stream-enterer, \[390\] no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination. What four? Here, Nandaka, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’ He possesses confirmed confidence in the Dhamma … in the Saṅgha.… He possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones, unbroken … leading to samādhi. A noble disciple who possesses these four things is a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination.

“Further, Nandaka, a noble disciple who possesses these four things becomes endowed with a long life span, whether celestial or human; he becomes endowed with beauty, whether celestial or human; he becomes endowed with happiness, whether celestial or human; he becomes endowed with fame, whether celestial or human; he becomes endowed with sovereignty, whether celestial or human. Now I say this, Nandaka, without having heard it from another ascetic or brahmin; rather, I say just what I have known, seen, and understood by myself.”

When this was said, a man said to Nandaka, the minister of the Licchavis: “It is time for your bath, sir.”

“Enough now, I say, with that external bath. This internal bath will suffice, namely, confidence in the Blessed One.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.30-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA833]] | S v 389 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA833]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.30]]
> ◄  [[sn55.29-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn55.31-bodhi]] ►
