---
sutta_code: "SN55.17"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyamittāmaccasutta "
  - "Friends and Colleagues (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.17]]
> ◄  [[sn55.16-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn55.18-bodhi]] ►

# SN55.17 Friends and Colleagues (2)

“Bhikkhus, those for whom you have compassion and who think you should be heeded—whether friends or colleagues, relatives or kinsmen—these you should exhort, settle, and establish in the four factors of stream-entry.

“What four? You should exhort, settle, and establish them in confirmed confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’…

“Bhikkhus, there may be alteration in the four great elements—in the earth element, the water element, the heat element, the air element—but there cannot be alteration in the noble disciple who possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha. Therein this is alteration: that the noble disciple who possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha might be reborn in hell, in the animal realm, or in the domain of ghosts. This is impossible.

“You should exhort, settle, and establish them in confirmed confidence in the Dhamma … in the Saṅgha … in the virtues dear to the noble ones … leading to samādhi.

“Bhikkhus, there may be alteration in the four great elements … but there cannot be \[366\] alteration in the noble disciple who possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones. Therein this is alteration: that the noble disciple who possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones might be reborn in hell, in the animal realm, or in the domain of ghosts. This is impossible.

“Those for whom you have compassion … these you should exhort, settle, and establish in these four factors of stream-entry.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.17-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA836]] | S v 365 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA836]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.17]]
> ◄  [[sn55.16-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn55.18-bodhi]] ►
