---
sutta_code: "SN55.12"
sutta_title:
  - "Brāhmaṇasutta "
  - "The Brahmins"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.12]]
> ◄  [[sn55.11-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn55.13-bodhi]] ►

# SN55.12 The Brahmins

At Sāvatthī. “Bhikkhus, the brahmins proclaim a way called ‘going upwards.’ They enjoin a disciple thus: ‘Come, good man, get up early and walk facing east. Do not avoid a pit, or a precipice, or a stump, or a thorny place, or a village pool, or a cesspool. You should expect death wherever you fall. Thus, good man, with the breakup of the body, after death, you will be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.’

“Now this practice of the brahmins, bhikkhus, is a foolish course, a stupid course; it does not lead to revulsion, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna. But I, bhikkhus, proclaim the way going upwards in the Noble One’s Discipline, the way which leads to utter revulsion, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.

“And what, bhikkhus, is that way going upwards, which leads to utter revulsion … to Nibbāna. \[362\] Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’ He possesses confirmed confidence in the Dhamma … in the Saṅgha.… He possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones, unbroken … leading to samādhi.

“This, bhikkhus, is that way going upwards, which leads to utter revulsion, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn55.12-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA842]] | S v 361 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA842]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN55]]  / 🌐 [[SN55.12]]
> ◄  [[sn55.11-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn55.13-bodhi]] ►
