---
sutta_code: "SN12.44"
sutta_title:
  - "Lokasutta "
  - "The World"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.44]]
> ◄  [[sn12.38-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn12.46-thanissaro]] ►

## SN12.44 The World

## ## Loka Sutta


Near Sāvatthī. There the Blessed One addressed the monks: “I will teach you the origination of the world & the ending of the world.[1](#sn12.44note01) Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.”

“As you say, lord,” the monks responded to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said: “And what is the origination of the world? Dependent on the eye & forms there arises eye-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling. From feeling as a requisite condition comes craving. From craving as a requisite condition comes clinging/sustenance. From clinging/sustenance as a requisite condition comes becoming. From becoming as a requisite condition comes birth. From birth as a requisite condition, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair come into play. This is the origination of the world.

“Dependent on the ear & sounds there arises ear-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact.… Dependent on the nose & aromas there arises nose-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact.… Dependent on the tongue & flavors there arises tongue-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact.… Dependent on the body & tactile sensations there arises body-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact.… Dependent on the intellect & mental qualities there arises intellect-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling. From feeling as a requisite condition comes craving. From craving as a requisite condition comes clinging/sustenance. From clinging/sustenance as a requisite condition comes becoming. From becoming as a requisite condition comes birth. From birth as a requisite condition, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair come into play. This is the origination of the world.

“And what is the ending of the world? Dependent on the eye & forms there arises eye-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling. From feeling as a requisite condition comes craving. Now, from the remainderless cessation & fading away of that very craving comes the cessation of clinging/sustenance. From the cessation of clinging/sustenance comes the cessation of becoming. From the cessation of becoming comes the cessation of birth. From the cessation of birth, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair all cease. Such is the cessation of this entire mass of stress & suffering. This is the ending of the world.

“Dependent on the ear & sounds there arises ear-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact.… Dependent on the nose & aromas there arises nose-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact.… Dependent on the tongue & flavors there arises tongue-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact.… Dependent on the body & tactile sensations there arises body-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact.… Dependent on the intellect & mental qualities there arises intellect-consciousness. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling. From feeling as a requisite condition comes craving. Now, from the remainderless cessation & fading away of that very craving comes the cessation of clinging/sustenance. From the cessation of clinging/sustenance comes the cessation of becoming. From the cessation of becoming comes the cessation of birth. From the cessation of birth, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair all cease. Such is the cessation of this entire mass of stress & suffering. This is the ending of the world.”

Note

1. For the meaning of “world,” here, see [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.82-thanissaro]].

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/dn-than/dn11-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/an-thanissaro-topfolders/an4/an4.45-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn12.44-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA233]] | S ii 73 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN35.107]], [[SA233]], [[MN148]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN12.15]], [[SN12.16]], [[SN12.17]], [[SN12.18]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN12]]  / 🌐 [[SN12.44]]
> ◄  [[sn12.38-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn12.46-thanissaro]] ►
