---
sutta_code: "SN53.1"
sutta_title:
  - " "
  - ""
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN53.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn53.13-bodhi]] ►

# SN53.1-12 The River Ganges—Eastward, Etc.

At Sāvatthī. There the Blessed One said this:

“Bhikkhus, there are these four jhānas. What four? Here, bhikkhus, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by thought and examination, with rapture and happiness born of seclusion. With the subsiding of thought and examination, he enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has internal confidence and unification of mind, is without thought and examination, and has rapture and happiness born of samādhi. With the fading away as well of rapture, he dwells equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, he experiences happiness with the body; he enters and dwells in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’ With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and displeasure, he enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, which is neither painful nor pleasant and includes the purification of mindfulness by equanimity. These are the four jhānas.

“Bhikkhus, just as the river Ganges slants, slopes, and inclines towards the east, so too a bhikkhu \[308\] who develops and cultivates the four jhānas slants, slopes, and inclines towards Nibbāna.

“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the four jhānas slant, slope, and incline towards Nibbāna? Here, bhikkhus, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna.

“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu who develops and cultivates the four jhānas slants, slopes, and inclines towards Nibbāna.”

  
  

(The remaining suttas of this vagga are to be similarly elaborated parallel to 45:92-102.)

> Six about slanting to the east  
>   
> And six about slanting to the ocean.  
>   
> These two sixes make up twelve:  
>   
> Thus the subchapter is recited.


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn53.1-) 

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]]  / 🌐 [[SN53.1]]
> ◄  [[]] 📜  [[sn53.13-bodhi]] ►
