---
sutta_code: "SN22.131"
sutta_title:
  - "Samudayasutta "
  - "Origin (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.131]]
> ◄  [[sn22.127-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.132-thanissaro]] ►

## SN22.131 Origination (1)

## ## Samudaya Sutta


On one occasion Ven. Sāriputta and Ven. Mahā Koṭṭhita were staying near Vārāṇasī in the Deer Park at Isipatana. As he was sitting to one side, Ven. Mahā Koṭṭhita said to Ven. Sāriputta, “‘Ignorance, ignorance,’ it is said, friend Sāriputta. Which ignorance? And to what extent is one immersed in ignorance?”

“There is the case, my friend, where an uninstructed, run-of-the-mill person doesn’t discern, as they have come to be, the origination, the disappearance, the allure, the drawbacks of—and the escape from—form.

“He doesn’t discern, as they have come to be, the origination, the disappearance, the allure, the drawbacks of—and the escape from—feeling.

“He doesn’t discern, as they have come to be, the origination, the disappearance, the allure, the drawbacks of—and the escape from—perception.

“He doesn’t discern, as they have come to be, the origination, the disappearance, the allure, the drawbacks of—and the escape from—fabrications.

“He doesn’t discern, as they have come to be, the origination, the disappearance, the allure, the drawbacks of—and the escape from—consciousness.

“This, my friend, is called ignorance, and it’s to this extent that one is immersed in ignorance.”

See also: [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.5-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.56-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.131-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA258]] | S iii 174 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SN22.129-130]], [[SA258]], [[SN22.133-134]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.131]]
> ◄  [[sn22.127-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.132-thanissaro]] ►
