---
sutta_code: "SN22.121"
sutta_title:
  - "Upādāniyasutta "
  - "Things That Can Be Clung To"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.121]]
> ◄  [[sn22.120-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.122-thanissaro]] ►

## SN22.121 Clinging

## ## Upādāna Sutta


Near Sāvatthī. There the Blessed One said, “Monks, I will teach you clingable phenomena & clinging. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.”

“As you say, lord,” the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said, “And which, monks, are clingable phenomena? Which is the clinging?

“Form is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“Feeling is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“Perception is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“Fabrications are clingable phenomena. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“Consciousness is a clingable phenomenon. Whatever desire-passion is there, that is the clinging there.

“These are called clingable phenomena. This is the clinging.”

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn44-thanissaro]]; [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn109-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.48-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn27-thanissaro/sn27.1-thanissaro]]; [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.110-thanissaro]]; [[sn35-44-thanissaro/sn35-thanissaro/sn35.191-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.121-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S iii 166 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.121]]
> ◄  [[sn22.120-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.122-thanissaro]] ►
