---
sutta_code: "SN22.25"
sutta_title:
  - "Chandarāgasutta "
  - "Desire and Lust"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.25]]
> ◄  [[sn22.23-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.26-thanissaro]] ►

## SN22.25 Desire & Passion

## ## Chanda-rāga Sutta


Near Sāvatthī.

“Monks, abandon any desire & passion for form. Thus that form will be abandoned, its root destroyed, made like a palmyra stump, deprived of the conditions of development, not destined for future arising.

“Abandon any desire & passion for feeling…

“Abandon any desire & passion for perception…

“Abandon any desire & passion for fabrications…

“Abandon any desire & passion for consciousness. Thus that consciousness will be abandoned, its root destroyed, made like a palmyra stump, deprived of the conditions of development, not destined for future arising.”

See also: [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.5-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.25-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA77]] | S iii 27 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA77]], [[SN23.9]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN47.38.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.25]]
> ◄  [[sn22.23-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.26-thanissaro]] ►
