---
sutta_code: "SN22.20"
sutta_title:
  - "Sahetuanattasutta "
  - "Nonself with Cause"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.20]]
> ◄  [[sn22.19-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.22-thanissaro]] ►

## SN22.20 Cause (3)

## ## Hetu Sutta


Near Sāvatthī. There the Blessed One addressed the monks, “Monks, form is not-self. Whatever cause & condition there is for the arising of form, that, too, is not-self. Being brought into play by what is not-self, how could form be self?

“Feeling is not-self…

“Perception is not-self…

“Fabrications are not-self…

“Consciousness is not-self. Whatever cause & condition there is for the arising of consciousness, that, too, is not-self. Being brought into play by what is not-self, how could consciousness be self?

“Seeing thus, the instructed disciple of the noble ones grows disenchanted with form, disenchanted with feeling, disenchanted with perception, disenchanted with fabrications, disenchanted with consciousness. Disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion, he is released. With release, there is the knowledge, ‘Released.’ He discerns that ‘Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for this world.’”

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn146-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.59-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.20-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA11]], [[SA12]] | S iii 24 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA12]], [[SA11]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.20]]
> ◄  [[sn22.19-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.22-thanissaro]] ►
