---
sutta_code: "SN22.23"
sutta_title:
  - "pariññāsutta "
  - "Full Understanding"
sutta-version: "Ven. Thanissaro"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.23]]
> ◄  [[sn22.22-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.25-thanissaro]] ►

## SN22.23 Comprehension

## ## Pariñña Sutta


Near Sāvatthī. “Monks, I will teach you the phenomena to be comprehended, as well as comprehension. Listen & pay close attention. I will speak.”

“As you say, lord,” the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said, “And which are the phenomena to be comprehended? Form is a phenomenon to be comprehended. Feeling… Perception… Fabrications… Consciousness is a phenomenon to be comprehended. These are called phenomena to be comprehended.

“And which is comprehension? Any ending of passion, ending of aversion, ending of delusion:[1](#sn22.23note01) This is called comprehension.”

Note

1. Comprehension here means the arahant’s full-knowing (see [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn117-thanissaro]]). As [[sn56.11-thanissaro]] shows, the first noble truth of suffering and stress is to be comprehended. As [[sn56.30-thanissaro]] further implies, when the first noble truth has been comprehended, the tasks with regard to all the other noble truths have been completed as well.

See also: [[Clean Files 3/Thanissaro 2/mn-thani/mn149-thanissaro]]; [[sn22-34-thanissaro/sn22-thanissaro/sn22.122-thanissaro]]; [[sn38.14-thanissaro]]; [[sn47.38-thanissaro]]

> **Edition Notice**  
Bhikkhu Thanissaro’s translations are arranged according to the Thai Tipitaka edition. Therefore, some sutta references may not align with the 6th Council or Suttacentral.net numbering schemes, especially in the Saṁyutta Nikāya (SN) and Aṅguttara Nikāya (AN).


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn22.23-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA72]] | S iii 26 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA72]], [[SN22.106]] |
| ------------------------ |

>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[SN47.38.]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN22]]  / 🌐 [[SN22.23]]
> ◄  [[sn22.22-thanissaro]] 📜  [[sn22.25-thanissaro]] ►
