---
sutta_code: "SN56.13"
sutta_title:
  - "Khandhasutta "
  - "Aggregates"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.13]]
> ◄  [[sn56.12-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn56.14-bodhi]] ►

# SN56.13 Aggregates

“Bhikkhus, there are these Four Noble Truths. What four? The noble truth of suffering, the noble truth of the origin of suffering, the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering.

  
  

“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of suffering? It should be said: the five aggregates subject to clinging; that is, the form aggregate subject to clinging … the consciousness aggregate subject to clinging. This is called the noble truth of suffering.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the origin of suffering? It is this craving which leads to renewed existence, accompanied by delight and lust, seeking delight here and there; that is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, craving for extermination. This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering? It is the remainderless fading away and cessation of that same craving, the giving up and relinquishing of it, freedom from it, nonreliance on it. This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering? It is this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view … right samādhi. This is called the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering. \[426\]

“These, bhikkhus, are the Four Noble Truths.

“Therefore, bhikkhus, an exertion should be made to understand: ‘This is suffering.’… An exertion should be made to understand: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn56.13-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 425 |
>[!summary]- Suggestions by Ven. Thanissaro 
> >In the SN and AN, some sutta references may not align with the numbering used in other editions or translations.
> - [[MN141]]


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN56]]  / 🌐 [[SN56.13]]
> ◄  [[sn56.12-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn56.14-bodhi]] ►
