---
sutta_code: "SN35.160"
sutta_title:
  - "Jīvakambavanasamādhisutta "
  - "Jivaka's Mango Grove (1)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.160]]
> ◄  [[sn35.159-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn35.161-bodhi]] ►

# SN35.160 Jivaka’s Mango Grove (1)

On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in Jı̄vaka’s Mango Grove. There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:

“Bhikkhus, develop samādhi. \[144\] When a bhikkhu is collected, things become manifest to him as they really are. And what becomes manifest to him as it really is? The eye becomes manifest to him as it really is—as impermanent. Forms become manifest to him as they really are—as impermanent. Eye-consciousness … Eye-contact … Whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—becomes manifest to him as it really is—as impermanent.

“The ear becomes manifest to him as it really is … The mind becomes manifest to him as it really is … Whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition … becomes manifest to him as it really is—as impermanent.

“Develop samādhi, bhikkhus. When a bhikkhu is collected, things become manifest to him as they really are.”

  
  

161 (6) Jı̄vakas Mango Grove (2)


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.160-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA207]] | S iv 151 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA207]], [[SN35.99]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.160]]
> ◄  [[sn35.159-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn35.161-bodhi]] ►
