---
sutta_code: "SN35.132"
sutta_title:
  - "Lohiccasutta "
  - "Lohicca"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.132]]
> ◄  [[sn35.131-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn35.133-bodhi]] ►

# SN35.132 Lohicca

On one occasion the Venerable Mahākaccāna was dwelling among the people of Avantı̄ in a forest hut at Makkarakaṭa. \[117\] Then a number of brahmin youths, students of the brahmin Lohicca, while collecting firewood, approached the Venerable Mahākaccāna’s forest hut. Having approached, they stomped and trampled all around the hut, and in a boisterous and noisy manner they played various pranks, saying: “These shaveling ascetics, menials, swarthy offspring of the Lord’s feet, are honoured, respected, esteemed, worshipped, and venerated by their servile devotees.”

Then the Venerable Mahākaccāna came out of his dwelling and said to those brahmin youths: “Don’t make any noise, boys. I will speak to you on the Dhamma.” When this was said, those youths became silent. Then the Venerable Mahākaccāna addressed those youths with verses:

> “Those men of old who excelled in virtue,  
>   
> Those brahmins who recalled the ancient rules,  
>   
> Their sense doors guarded, well protected,  
>   
> Dwelt having vanquished wrath within.  
>   
> They took delight in Dhamma and meditation,  
>   
> Those brahmins who recalled the ancient rules.
> 
> >   
> >   
> 
> “But these have fallen, claiming ‘We recite.’  
>   
> Puffed up by clan, faring unrighteously,  
>   
> Overcome by anger, armed with diverse weapons,  
>   
> They molest both frail and firm.
> 
>   
>   
> 
> “For one with sense doors unguarded  
>   
> \[All the vows he undertakes\] are vain  
>   
> Just like the wealth a man gains in a dream: \[118\]  
>   
> Fasting and sleeping on the ground,  
>   
> Bathing at dawn, \[study of\] the three Vedas,  
>   
> Rough hides, matted locks, and dirt;  
>   
> Hymns, rules and vows, austerities,  
>   
> Hypocrisy, bent staffs, ablutions:  
>   
> These emblems of the brahmins  
>   
> Are used to increase their worldly gains.
> 
>   
>   
> 
> “A mind that is well collected,  
>   
> Clear and free from blemish,  
>   
> Tender towards all sentient beings—  
>   
> That is the path for attaining Brahmā.”

Then those brahmin youths, angry and displeased, approached the brahmin Lohicca and told him: “See now, sir, you should know that the ascetic Mahākaccāna categorically denigrates and scorns the hymns of the brahmins.”

When this was said, the brahmin Lohicca was angry and displeased. But then it occurred to him: “It is not proper for me to abuse and revile the ascetic Mahākaccāna solely on the basis of what I have heard from these youths. Let me approach him and inquire.”

Then the brahmin Lohicca, together with those brahmin youths, approached the Venerable Mahākaccāna. \[119\] He exchanged greetings with the Venerable Mahākaccāna and, when they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to him: “Master Kaccāna, did a number of brahmin youths, my students, come this way while collecting firewood?”

“They did, brahmin.”

“Did Master Kaccāna have any conversation with them?”

“I did have a conversation with them, brahmin.”

“What kind of conversation did you have with them, Master Kaccāna?”

“The conversation I had with those youths was like this:

> “‘Those men of old who excelled in virtue,  
>   
> Those brahmins who recalled the ancient rules, …  
>   
> Tender towards all sentient beings—  
>   
> That is the path for attaining Brahmā.’

Such was the conversation that I had with those youths.”

“Master Kaccāna said ‘with sense doors unguarded.’ In what way, Master Kaccāna, is one ‘with sense doors unguarded’?”

“Here, brahmin, having seen a form with the eye, someone is intent upon a pleasing form and repelled by a displeasing form. He dwells without having set up mindfulness of the body, with a limited mind, \[120\] and he does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder. Having heard a sound with the ear ... Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, someone is intent upon a pleasing mental phenomenon and repelled by a displeasing mental phenomenon. He dwells without having set up mindfulness of the body ... cease without remainder. It is in such a way, brahmin, that one is ‘with sense doors unguarded.’”

“It is wonderful, Master Kaccāna! It is amazing, Master Kaccāna! How Master Kaccāna has declared one whose sense doors are actually unguarded to be one ‘with sense doors unguarded’! But Master Kaccāna said ‘with sense doors guarded.’ In what way, Master Kaccāna, is one ‘with sense doors guarded’?”

“Here, brahmin, having seen a form with the eye, someone is not intent upon a pleasing form and not repelled by a displeasing form. He dwells having set up mindfulness of the body, with a measureless mind, and he understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without remainder. Having heard a sound with the ear ... Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, someone is not intent upon a pleasing mental phenomenon and not repelled by a displeasing mental phenomenon. He dwells having set up mindfulness of the body ... cease without remainder. It is in such a way, brahmin, that one is ‘with sense doors guarded.’”

“It is wonderful, Master Kaccāna! It is amazing, Master Kaccāna! \[121\] How Master Kaccāna has declared one whose sense doors are actually guarded to be one ‘with sense doors guarded’! Magnificent, Master Kaccāna! Magnificent, Master Kaccāna! The Dhamma has been made clear in many ways by Master Kaccāna … (as in §127) ... From today let Master Kaccāna remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.

“Let Master Kaccāna approach the Lohicca family just as he approaches the families of the lay followers in Makkarakaṭa. The brahmin youths and maidens there will pay homage to Master Kaccāna, they will stand up for him out of respect, they will offer him a seat and water, and that will lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.”

  
  

133 (10) Verahaccāni


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn35.132-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA255]] | S iv 134 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA255]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN35]]  / 🌐 [[SN35.132]]
> ◄  [[sn35.131-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn35.133-bodhi]] ►
