---
sutta_code: "SN45.12"
sutta_title:
  - "Dutiyavihārasutta "
  - "Dwelling (2)"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.12]]
> ◄  [[sn45.11-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn45.13-bodhi]] ►

# SN45.12 Dwelling (2)

© Translated from the Pali by Bhikkhu Bodhi.  (More copyright information)
1At Sāvatthī. "Bhikkhus, I wish to go into seclusion for three months. I should not be approached by anyone except the one who brings me almsfood."

"Yes, venerable sir," those bhikkhus replied, and no one approached the Blessed One except the one who brought him almsfood.

2Then, when those three months had passed, the Blessed One emerged from seclusion and addressed the bhikkhus thus:

"Bhikkhus, I have been dwelling in part of the abode in which I dwelt just after I became fully enlightened. I have understood thus: ‘There is feeling with wrong view as condition, also feeling with the subsiding of wrong view as condition. There is feeling with right view as condition, also feeling with the subsiding of right view as condition … . There is feeling with wrong samādhi as condition, also feeling with the subsiding of wrong samādhi as condition. There is feeling with right samādhi as condition, also feeling with the subsiding of right samādhi as condition. There is feeling with desire as condition, also feeling with the subsiding of desire as condition. There is feeling with thought as condition, also feeling with the subsiding of thought as condition. There is feeling with perception as condition, also feeling with the subsiding of perception as condition.

"‘When desire has not subsided, and thought has not subsided, and perception has not subsided, there is feeling with that as condition. When desire has subsided, and thoughts have not subsided, and perceptions have not subsided, there is also feeling with that as condition. When desire has subsided, and thoughts have subsided, and perceptions have not subsided, there is also feeling with that as condition. When desire has subsided, and thought has subsided, and perception has subsided, there is also feeling with that as condition. There is effort for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained. When that stage has been reached, there is also feeling with that as condition.’"


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.12-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  |  | S v 13 |
> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.12]]
> ◄  [[sn45.11-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn45.13-bodhi]] ►
