---
sutta_code: "SN45.34"
sutta_title:
  - "Pāraṅgama "
  - "Going To The Far Shore"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.34]]
> ◄  [[sn45.33-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn45.35-bodhi]] ►

# SN45.34 Going Beyond

At Sāvatthı̄. “Bhikkhus, these eight things, when developed and cultivated, lead to going beyond from the near shore to the far shore. What eight? Right view … right samādhi. These eight things, when developed and cultivated, lead to going beyond from the near shore to the far shore.”

This is what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this:

> “Few are those among humankind  
>   
> Who go beyond to the far shore.  
>   
> The rest of the people merely run  
>   
> Up and down along the bank.
> 
> >   
> >   
> 
> “When the Dhamma is rightly expounded  
>   
> Those who practise in accord with the Dhamma  
>   
> Are the people who will go beyond  
>   
> The realm of Death so hard to cross.
> 
>   
>   
> 
> “Having left behind the dark qualities,  
>   
> The wise man should develop the bright ones.  
>   
> Having come from home into homelessness,  
>   
> Where it is hard to take delight—
> 
>   
>   
> 
> “There in seclusion he should seek delight,  
>   
> Having left behind sensual pleasures.  
>   
> Owning nothing, the wise man  
>   
> Should cleanse himself of mental defilements.
> 
>   
>   
> 
> “Those whose minds are well developed  
>   
> In the factors of enlightenment,  
>   
> Who through nonclinging find delight  
>   
> In the relinquishment of grasping:  
>   
> Those luminous ones with taints destroyed  
>   
> Are fully quenched in the world.” \[25\]


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.34-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA771]] | S v 24 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[AN10.117]], [[SA771]], [[DHP\|DHP85]], [[AN10.118]], [[AN10.169]], [[AN10.170]], [[SN46.17]], [[DHP\|DHP86]], [[DHP\|DHP87]], [[DHP\|DHP88]], [[DHP\|DHP89]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.34]]
> ◄  [[sn45.33-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn45.35-bodhi]] ►
