---
sutta_code: "SN45.4"
sutta_title:
  - "Jāṇussoṇibrāhmaṇasutta "
  - "Brahmin Jāṇussoṇi"
sutta-version: "Ven. Bodhi"
language: "English"
---

> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.4]]
> ◄  [[sn45.3-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn45.5-bodhi]] ►

# SN45.4 The Brahmin

At Sāvatthı̄. Then, in the morning, the Venerable Ānanda dressed and, taking bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthı̄ for alms. The Venerable Ānanda saw the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi departing from Sāvatthı̄ in an all-white chariot drawn by mares. The horses yoked to it were white, its ornaments were white, the chariot was white, its upholstery was white, the reins, goad, and canopy were white, his turban, clothes, and sandals were white, and he was being fanned by a white chowry. People, having seen this, said: “Divine indeed, sir, is the vehicle! It appears to be a divine vehicle indeed, sir!”

Then, when the Venerable Ānanda had walked for alms in Sāvatthı̄ and returned from his alms round, after his meal he approached the Blessed One, \[5\] paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Here, venerable sir, in the morning I dressed and, taking bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthı̄ for alms. I saw the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi departing from Sāvatthı̄ in an all-white chariot drawn by mares…. People, having seen this, said: ‘Divine indeed, sir, is the vehicle! It appears to be a divine vehicle indeed, sir!’ Is it possible, venerable sir, to point out a divine vehicle in this Dhamma and Discipline?”

“It is possible, Ānanda,” the Blessed One said. “This is a designation for this Noble Eightfold Path: ‘the divine vehicle’ and ‘the vehicle of Dhamma’ and ‘the unsurpassed victory in battle.’

“Right view, Ānanda, when developed and cultivated, has as its final goal the removal of lust, the removal of hatred, the removal of delusion. Right intention … Right samādhi, when developed and cultivated, \[6\] has as its final goal the removal of lust, the removal of hatred, the removal of delusion.

“In this way, Ānanda, it may be understood how this is a designation for this Noble Eightfold Path: ‘the divine vehicle’ and ‘the vehicle of Dhamma’ and ‘the unsurpassed victory in battle.’”

This is what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this:

> “Its qualities of faith and wisdom  
>   
> Are always yoked evenly together.  
>   
> Shame is its pole, mind its yoke-tie,  
>   
> Mindfulness the watchful charioteer.
> 
> >   
> >   
> 
> “The chariot’s ornament is virtue,  
>   
> Its axle jh̄na, energy its wheels;  
>   
> Equanimity keeps the burden balanced,  
>   
> Desirelessness serves as upholstery.
> 
>   
>   
> 
> “Good will, harmlessness, and seclusion:  
>   
> These are the chariot’s weaponry,  
>   
> Forbearance its armour and shield,  
>   
> As it rolls towards security from bondage.
> 
>   
>   
> 
> “This divine vehicle unsurpassed  
>   
> Originates from within oneself.  
>   
> The wise depart from the world in it,  
>   
> Inevitably winning the victory.”


---

## 🌿 Sutta Connections

> [!check]  Click for [available texts and translations ](obsidian://search?query=file:sn45.4-) 

> [!check] Parallels 
> | In Nikayas  | In Āgamas  | PTS     |
> | ----------- | ---------- | ------- |
> |  | [[SA769]] | S v 4 |
> > [!check]- Partial parallels 
> > 
| [[SA769]] |
| ------------------------ |


> [!important] ☸️ [[Suttas.base#catalogue|Catalogue]] | 📔 [[SN]] / 📂 [[SN45]]  / 🌐 [[SN45.4]]
> ◄  [[sn45.3-bodhi]] 📜  [[sn45.5-bodhi]] ►
